####-SPECIAL NOTE: 

 
In this reprint several minor inaccuracies, most of them noted by readers, have 
been corrected. For example, the rune text now corresponds exactly with the runes 
on  Thror's  Map.  More  important  is  the  matter  of  Chapter  Five.  There  the  true 
story  of  the  ending  of  the  Riddle  Game,  as  it  was  eventually  revealed  (under 
pressure)  by Bilbo  to Gandalf,  is  now  given  according  to  the Red Book,  in  place 
of  the  version  Bilbo  first  gave  to  his  friends,  and  actually  set  down  in  his  diary. 
This  departure  from  truth  on  the  part  of  a  most  honest  hobbit  was  a  portent  of 
great  significance.  It  does  not,  however,  concern  the  present  story,  and  those who 
in this edition make their first acquaintance with hobbit-lore need not troupe about 
it.  Its  explanation  lies in the history of the Ring, as it was set out in the chronicles 
of the Red Book of Westmarch, and is now told in The Lord of the Rings. 
 
A final note may be added, on a point raised by several students of  the  lore of 
the  period.  On  Thror's  Map  is  written  Here  of  old  was  Thrain  King  under  the 
Mountain;  yet  Thrain  was  the  son  of  Thror,  the  last  King  under  the  Mountain 
before  the  coming  of  the  dragon.  The  Map,  however,  is  not  in  error.  Names  are 
often  repeated  in  dynasties,  and  the  genealogies  show  that  a  distant  ancestor  of 
Thror  was  referred  to,  Thrain  I,  a  fugitive  from  Moria,  who  first  discovered  the 
Lonely Mountain, Erebor, and ruled there for a while, before his people moved on 
to the remoter mountains of the North. 

####-Chapter I <br>

An Unexpected Party

In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty, wet hole, filled with 
the ends of worms and an oozy smell, nor yet a dry, bare, sandy hole with nothing 
in it to sit down on or to eat: it was a hobbit-hole, and that means comfort. 
It  had  a  perfectly  round  door  like  a  porthole,  painted  green,  with  a  shiny 
yellow  brass  knob  in  the  exact middle. The  door  opened  on  to  a  tube-shaped hall 
like  a  tunnel:  a  very  comfortable  tunnel without  smoke, with  panelled walls,  and 
floors  tiled  and  carpeted,  provided with  polished  chairs,  and  lots  and  lots of pegs 
for  hats  and  coats - the hobbit was  fond of visitors. The  tunnel wound on  and on, 
going  fairly  but  not  quite  straight  into  the  side  of  the  hill  -  The  Hill,  as  all  the 
people for many miles round called  it - and many little round doors opened out of 
it,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  another.  No  going  upstairs  for  the  hobbit: 
bedrooms,  bathrooms,  cellars,  pantries  (lots  of  these),  wardrobes  (he  had  whole 
rooms devoted to clothes), kitchens, dining-rooms, all were on the same floor, and 
indeed  on  the  same  passage. The  best  rooms were  all  on  the  left-hand side (going 
in),  for  these  were  the  only  ones  to  have  windows,  deep-set  round  windows 
looking over his garden and meadows beyond, sloping down to the river.  
This  hobbit  was  a  very  well-to-do  hobbit,  and  his  name  was  Baggins.  The 
Bagginses  had  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  The  Hill  for  time  out  of mind,  and 
people considered them very respectable, not only because most of them were rich, 
but  also  because  they  never had  any  adventures or did  anything unexpected: you 
could tell what a Baggins would say on any question without the bother of asking 
him. This  is a story of how a Baggins had an adventure,  found himself doing and 
saying things altogether unexpected. He may have lost the neighbours' respect, but 
he gained-well, you will see whether he gained anything in the end.
The  mother  of  our  particular  hobbit  …  what  is  a  hobbit?  I  suppose  hobbits 
need  some description nowadays,  since  they have become  rare  and  shy of the Big 
People,  as  they  call  us.  They  are  (or  were)  a  little  people,  about  half  our  height, 
and  smaller  than  the  bearded Dwarves. Hobbits  have  no  beards. There  is  little  or 
no  magic  about  them,  except  the  ordinary  everyday  sort  which  helps  them  to 
disappear  quietly  and  quickly  when  large  stupid  folk  like  you  and  me  come 
blundering  along,  making  a  noise  like  elephants  which  they  can  hear  a  mile  off. 
They  are  inclined  to  be    at  in  the  stomach;  they  dress  in  bright  colours  (chiefly 

####-green  and  yellow);  wear  no  shoes,  because  their  feet  grow  natural  leathery  soles 
and thick warm brown hair like the stuff on their heads (which is curly); have long 
clever brown fingers, good-natured faces, and laugh deep fruity laughs (especially 
after  dinner,  which  they  have  twice  a  day when  they  can  get  it). Now  you  know 
enough  to  go  on  with.  As  I  was  saying,  the  mother  of  this  hobbit  -  of  Bilbo 
Baggins, that is  - was  the fabulous Belladonna Took, one of  the  three remarkable 
daughters  of  the  Old  Took,  head  of  the  hobbits  who  lived  across  The Water,  the 
small river that ran at the foot of The Hill. It was often said (in other families) that 
long  ago  one  of  the  Took  ancestors  must  have  taken  a  fairy  wife.  That  was,  of 
course,  absurd,  but  certainly  there  was  still  something  not  entirely  hobbit-like 
about  them,  -  and  once  in  a while members  of  the  Took-clan would go and have 
adventures. They discreetly disappeared, and  the  family hushed  it up; but  the  fact 
remained  that  the  Tooks  were  not  as  respectable  as  the  Bagginses,  though  they 
were undoubtedly richer. Not that Belladonna Took ever had any adventures after 
she  became  Mrs.  Bungo  Baggins.  Bungo,  that  was  Bilbo's  father,  built  the  most 
luxurious  hobbit-hole  for  her  (and  partly  with  her  money)  that  was  to  be  found 
either  under  The  Hill  or  over  The  Hill  or  across  The  Water,  and  there  they 
remained  to  the  end  of  their  days.  Still  it  is  probable  that  Bilbo,  her  only  son, 
although  he  looked  and  behaved  exactly  like  a  second  edition  of  his  solid  and 
comfortable  father,  got  something  a  bit  queer  in  his makeup  from  the Took  side, 
something  that  only  waited  for  a  chance  to  come  out.  The  chance  never  arrived, 
until Bilbo Baggins was grown up, being about fifty years old or so, and living in 
the  beautiful  hobbit-hole  built  by  his  father,  which  I  have  just described  for you, 
until he had in fact apparently settled down immovably.  
By some curious chance one morning long ago in the quiet of the world, when 
there  was  less  noise  and  more  green,  and  the  hobbits  were  still  numerous  and 
prosperous,  and  Bilbo  Baggins  was  standing  at  his  door  after  breakfast  smoking 
an  enormous  long  wooden  pipe  that  reached  nearly  down  to  his  woolly  toes 
(neatly brushed)  - Gandalf  came  by. Gandalf!  If  you  had  heard  only  a  quarter  of 
what  I  have  heard  about  him,  and  I  have  only  heard  very  little  of  all  there  is  to 
hear,  you  would  be  prepared  for  any  sort  I  of  remarkable  tale.  Tales  and 
adventures  sprouted  up  all  over  the  place  wherever  he  went,  in  the  most 
extraordinary  fashion.  He  had  not  been  down  that  way  under  The  Hill  for  ages 
and  ages,  not  since  his  friend  the  Old  Took  died,  in  fact,  and  the  hobbits  had 
almost forgotten what he looked like. He had been away over The Hill and across 
The  Water  on  business  of  his  own  since  they  were  all  small  hobbit-boys  and 
hobbit-girls. 

####-All that the unsuspecting Bilbo saw that morning was an old man with a staff. 
He had a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, a silver scarf over which a white 
beard hung down below his waist, and immense black boots. 
"Good  morning!"  said  Bilbo,  and  he  meant  it.  The  sun  was  shining,  and  the 
grass was very green. But Gandalf looked at him from under long bushy eyebrows 
that  stuck  out  further  than  the  brim  of  his  shady  hat.  "What  do  you  mean?"  be 
said. "Do you wish me a good morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether 
I  want  not;  or  that  you  feel  good  this  morning;  or  that  it  is  morning  to  be  good 
on?" 
"All  of  them  at  once,"  said  Bilbo.  "And  a  very  fine  morning  for  a  pipe  of 
tobacco out of doors, into the bargain. If you have a pipe about you, sit down  and 
have  a  fill of mine! There's no hurry, we have  all  the day before us!" Then Bilbo 
sat down on a seat by his door, crossed his legs, and blew out a beautiful grey ring 
of  smoke  that  sailed  up  into  the  air without  breaking  and  floated  away  over  The 
Hill. 
"Very  pretty!"  said  Gandalf.  "But  I  have  no  time  to  blow  smoke-rings  this 
morning.  I  am  looking  for  someone  to  share  in  an  adventure  that  I  am  arranging, 
and it's very difficult to find anyone." 
«I should think so  - in these parts! We are plain quiet folk and have no use for 
adventures.  Nasty  .disturbing  uncomfortable  things! Make  you  late  for  dinner!  I 
can’t  think  what  anybody  sees  in  them,»  said  our  Mr.  Baggins,  and  stuck  one 
thumb  behind  his  braces,  and  blew  out  another  even  bigger  smoke-ring. Then he 
took out his morning  letters, and begin  to  read, pretending  to  take no more notice 
of  the old man. He had decided  that he was not quite his  sort,  and wanted him  to 
go away. But  the old man did not move. He stood  leaning on his stick and gazing 
at the hobbit without saying anything, till Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and even 
a little cross. 
"Good  morning!"  he  said  at  last.  "We  don't  want  any  adventures  here,  thank 
you! You might try over The Hill or across The Water." By this he meant that the 
conversation was at an end. 
"What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!" said Gandalf. "Now you 
mean that you want to get rid of me, and that it won't be good till I move off." 
"Not  at  all,  not  at  all,  my  dear  sir!  Let  me  see,  I  don't  think  I  know  your 
name?" 
"Yes,  yes,  my  dear  sir  -  and  I  do  know  your  name, Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins.  And 
you  do  know  my  name,  though  you  don't  remember  that  I  belong  to  it.  I  am 

####-Gandalf,  and  Gandalf  means  me!  To  think  that  I  should  have  lived  to  be  good-
morninged by Belladonna Took's son, as if I was selling buttons at the door!" 
"Gandalf,  Gandalf!  Good  gracious  me!  Not  the  wandering  wizard  that  gave 
Old Took a pair of magic diamond studs that fastened themselves and never came 
undone  till  ordered?  Not  the  fellow  who  used  to  tell  such  wonderful  tales  at 
parties, about dragons and goblins and giants and  the rescue of princesses and  the 
unexpected  luck  of  widows'  sons?  Not  the  man  that  used  to  make  such 
particularly  excellent  fireworks!  I  remember  those!  Old  Took  used  to  have  them 
on  Midsummer's  Eve.  Splendid!  They  used  to  go  up  like  great  lilies  and 
snapdragons and laburnums of fire and hang in the twilight all evening!" You will 
notice already that Mr. Baggins was not quite so prosy as he liked to believe, also 
that  he was  very  fond  of  flowers. "Dear me!" she went on. "Not  the Gandalf who 
was  responsible  for so many quiet  lads and  lasses going off  into  the Blue  for mad 
adventures.  Anything  from  climbing  trees  to  visiting  Elves  -  or  sailing  in  ships, 
sailing  to other  shores! Bless me,  life used  to be quite  inter  - I mean, you used  to 
upset things badly in these parts once upon a time. I beg your pardon, but I had no 
idea you were still in business." 
"Where else  should  I be?"  said  the wizard.  "All  the  same  I am pleased  to  find 
you  remember  something about me. You seem  to  remember my  fireworks kindly, 
at any  rate,  land  that  is not without hope.  Indeed  for your old grand-father Took's 
sake, and for the sake of poor Belladonna, I will give you what you asked for." 
"I beg your pardon, I haven't asked for anything!" 
"Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I give it you. In fact I will go so far as 
to  send  you  on  this  adventure.  Very  amusing  for  me,  very  good  for  you  and 
profitable too, very likely, if you ever get over it." 
"Sorry!  I  don't  want  any  adventures,  thank  you.  Not  today.  Good  morning! 
But please come to tea - any time you like! Why not tomorrow? Come tomorrow! 
Good-bye!" 
With  that  the hobbit  turned and  scuttled  inside his  round green door, and  shut 
it as quickly as he dared, not to seen rude. Wizards after all are wizards. 
"What on earth did I ask him to tea for!" he said to him-self, as he went to the 
pantry. He had only  just had break  fast, but he  thought a cake or  two and a drink 
of  something  would  do  him  good  after  his  fright.  Gandalf  in  the  meantime  was 
still  standing  outside  the  door,  and  laughing  long  but  quietly.  After  a  while  he 
stepped  up,  and  with  the  spike  of  his  staff  scratched  a  queer  sign  on  the  hobbit's 
beautiful  green  front-door.  Then  he  strode  away,  just  about  the  time  when  Bilbo 

####-was  finishing  his  second  cake  and  beginning  to  think  that  he  had  escape 
adventures very well. 
The  next  day  he  had  almost  forgotten  about  Gandalf  He  did  not  remember 
things  very  well,  unless  he  put  them  down  on  his  Engagement  Tablet:  like  this: 
Gandalf ’¥a Wednesday. Yesterday he had been too flustered to do anything of the 
kind. Just before tea-time there came a tremendous ring on the front-door bell, and 
then he remembered! He rushed and put on the kettle, and put out another cup and 
saucer and an extra cake or two, and ran to the door.  
"I am so sorry  to keep you waiting!" he was going  to say, when he saw  that  it 
was not Gandalf at all. It was a dwarf with a blue beard tucked into a golden belt, 
and  very  bright  eyes  under  his  dark-green hood.  As  soon a  the door was opened, 
he pushed inside, just as if he had been expected. 
He hung his hooded cloak on the nearest peg, and "Dwalin at your service!" he 
said with a low bow.  
"Bilbo  Baggins  at  yours!"  said  the  hobbit,  too  surprised  to  ask  any  questions 
for  the  moment.  When  the  silence  that  followed  had  become  uncomfortable,  he 
added:  "I  am  just  about  to  take  tea;  pray  come  and  have  some with me." A  little 
stiff  perhaps,  but  he  meant  it  kindly.  And  what  would  you  do,  if  an  uninvited 
dwarf came and hung his things up in your hall without a word of explanation? 
They had not been at table long, in fact they had hardly reached the third cake, 
when there came another even louder ring at the bell. 
"Excuse me!" said the hobbit, and off he went to the door.  
"So  you  have  got  here  at  last!" was what  he was  going  to  say  to Gandalf  this 
time.  But  it  was  not  Gandalf.  Instead  there  was  a  very  old-looking  dwarf  on  the 
step with a white beard and a scarlet hood; and he too hopped inside as soon as the 
door was open, just as if he had been invited. 
"I  see  they  have  begun  to  arrive  already,"  he  said  when  he  caught  sight  of 
Dwalin's  green  hood  hanging  up.  He  hung  his  red  one  next  to  it,  and  "Balin  at 
your service!" he said with his hand on his breast. 
"Thank  you!"  said  Bilbo with  a  gasp.  It was  not  the  correct  thing  to  say,  but 
they have begun  to  arrive had  flustered him badly. He  liked visitors, but he  liked 
to know  them before  they arrived, and he preferred  to ask  them himself. He had a 
horrible  thought  that  the  cakes might  run  short,  and  then  he-as  the host: he knew 
his duty and stuck to it however painful-he might have to go without. 
"Come  along  in,  and  have  some  tea!"  he  managed  to  say  after  taking  a  deep 
breath. 

####-"A  little  beer  would  suit  me  better,  if  it  is  all  the  same  to  you, my  good  sir," 
said  Balin  with  the  white  beard.  "But  I  don't  mind  some  cake-seed-cake,  if  you 
have any." 
"Lots!"  Bilbo  found  himself  answering,  to  his  own  surprise;  and  he  found 
himself  scuttling  off,  too,  to  the  cellar  to  fill  a  pint  beer-mug, and to the pantry to 
fetch  two  beautiful  round  seed-cakes  which  he  had  baked  that  afternoon  for  his 
after-supper morsel. 
When he got back Balin and Dwalin were  talking at  the  table  like old  friends 
(as  a  matter  of  fact  they  were  brothers).  Bilbo  plumped  down  the  beer  and  the 
cake  in  front  of  them, when  loud  came  a  ring  at  the  bell  again,  and  then  another 
ring. 
"Gandalf for certain this time," he thought as he puffed along the passage. But 
it was not. It was two more dwarves, both with blue hoods, silver belts, and yellow 
beards;  and  each  of  them  carried  a  bag  of  tools  and  a  spade.  In  they  hopped,  as 
soon as the door began to open-Bilbo was hardly surprised at all. 
"What can I do for you, my dwarves?" he said. "Kili at your service!" said the 
one.  "And  Fili!"  added  the  other;  and  they  both  swept  off  their  blue  hoods  and 
bowed. 
"At  yours  and  your  family's!"  replied  Bilbo,  remembering  his  manners  this 
time. 
"Dwalin and Balin here already, I see," said Kili. "Let us join the throng!" 
"Throng!" thought Mr. Baggins. "I don't like the sound of that. I really must sit 
down for a minute and collect my wits, and have a drink." He had only just had a 
sip-in  the  corner,  while  the  four  dwarves  sat  around  the  table,  and  talked  about 
mines  and  gold  and  troubles  with  the  goblins,  and  the  depredations  of  dragons, 
and lots of other things which he did not understand, and did not want to, for they 
sounded much too adventurous-when, ding-dong-a-ling-' dang, his bell rang again, 
as if some naughty little hobbit-boy was trying to pull the handle off. "Someone at 
the  door!"  he  said,  blinking.  "Some  four,  I  should  say  by  the  sound,"  said  Fili. 
"Be-sides, we saw them coming along behind us in the distance." 
The  poor  little  hobbit  sat  down  in  the  hall  and  put  his  head  in  his  hands,  and 
wondered  what  had  happened,  and  what  was  going  to  happen,  and  whether  they 
would all stay  to supper. Then  the bell rang again  louder  than ever, and he had  to 
run  to  the  door.  It  was  not  four  after  all,  t  was  FIVE.  Another  dwarf  had  come 
along while he was wondering in the hall. He had hardly turned the knob, be-x)re 
they were all  inside, bowing and  saying  "at your  service" one after another. Dori, 
Nori,  Ori,  Oin,  and  Gloin  were  their  names;  and  very  soon  two  purple  hoods,  a 

####-grey hood, a brown hood, and a white hood were hanging on the pegs, and off they 
marched  with  their  broad  hands  stuck  in  their  gold  and  silver  belts  to  join  the 
others. Already  it had almost become a  throng. Some called  for ale, and some  for 
porter,  and  one  for  coffee,  and  all  of  them  for  cakes;  so  the hobbit was kept very 
busy for a while. 
A  big  jug  of  coffee  bad  just  been  set  in  the  hearth,  the  seed-cakes were gone, 
and  the  dwarves  were  starting  on  a  round  of  buttered  scones,  when  there  came-a 
loud  knock.  Not  a  ring,  but  a  hard  rat-tat  on  the  hobbit's  beautiful  green  door. 
Somebody was banging with a stick! 
Bilbo  rushed  along  the  passage,  very  angry,  and  altogether  bewildered  and 
bewuthered-this  was  the  most  awkward  Wednesday  he  ever  remembered.  He 
pulled open the door with a jerk, and they all fell in, one on top of the other. More 
dwarves,  four  more!  And  there  was  Gandalf  behind,  leaning  on  his  staff  and 
laughing. He had made quite a dent on the beautiful door; he had also, by the way, 
knocked out the secret mark that he had put there the morning before. 
"Carefully!  Carefully!"  he  said.  "It  is  not  like  you,  Bilbo,  to  keep  friends 
waiting  on  the  mat,  and  then  open  the  door  like  a  pop-gun!  Let  me  introduce 
Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, and especially Thorin!" 
"At your service!" said Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur standing in a row. Then they 
hung  up  two  yellow  hoods  and  a  pale  green  one;  and  also  a  sky-blue one with  a 
long silver tassel. This last belonged to Thorin, an enormously important dwarf, in 
fact  no  other  than  the  great  Thorin  Oakenshield  himself,  who  was  not  at  all 
pleased at falling flat on Bilbo's mat with Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur on top of him. 
For  one  thing  Bombur  was  immensely  fat  and  heavy.  Thorin  indeed  was  very 
haughty,  and  said  nothing  about  service;  but  poor Mr. Baggins  said  he was  sorry 
so  many  times,  that  at  last  he  grunted  "pray  don't  mention  it,"  and  stopped 
frowning. 
"Now we  are  all here!"  said Gandalf,  looking  at  the  row of  thirteen hoods-the 
best  detachable  party  hoods-and his own hat hanging on  the pegs. "Quite a merry 
gathering! 
I hope there is something left for the late-comers to eat and drink! What's that? 
Tea! No thank you! A little red wine, I think, for me." "And for me," said Thorin. 
"And raspberry jam and apple-tart," said Bifur. "And mince-pies and cheese," said 
Bofur.  "And  pork-pie  and  salad,"  said  Bombur.  "And  more  cakes-and  ale-and 
coffee, if you don't mind," called the other dwarves through the door.  

####-"Put  on  a  few  eggs,  there's  a  good  fellow!"  Gandalf  called  after  him,  as  the 
hobbit  stumped  off  to  the  pantries.  "And  just  bring  out  the  cold  chicken  and 
pickles!" 
"Seems  to  know  as  much  about  the  inside  of  my  larders  as  I  do  myself!" 
thought Mr. Baggins, who was  feeling  positively  flummoxed,  and was  beginning 
to wonder whether  a most wretched  adventure  had  not  come  right  into his house. 
By  the  time he had got all  the bottles and dishes and knives and forks and glasses 
and  plates  and  spoons  and  things  piled  up  on  big  trays,  he  was  getting  very  hot, 
and red in the face, and annoyed. 
"Confusticate  and  bebother  these  dwarves!"  he  said  aloud.  "Why  don't  they 
come and lend a hand?" Lo and behold! there stood Balin and Dwalin at the door 
of  the  kitchen,  and  Fili  and Kili  behind  them,  and  before  he  could  say  knife  they 
had  whisked  the  trays  and  a  couple  of  small  tables  into  the  parlour  and  set  out 
everything afresh. 
Gandalf  sat  at  the  head  of  the  party with  the  thirteen,  dwarves  all  round:  and 
Bilbo  sat  on  a  stool  at  the  fireside,  nibbling  at  a  biscuit  (his  appetite  was  quite 
taken away), and trying to look as if this was all perfectly  ordinary and. not in the 
least  an  adventure. The  dwarves  ate  and  ate,  and  talked  and  talked,  and  time  got 
on.  At  last  they  pushed  their  chairs  back,  and  Bilbo  made  a  move  to  collect  the 
plates and glasses. 
"I suppose you will all stay to supper?" he said in his politest unpressing tones. 
"Of  course!"  said Thorin.  "And  after. We  shan't  get  through  the  business  till  late, 
and we must have some music first. Now to clear up!" 
Thereupon  the  twelve  dwarves-not  Thorin,  he  was  too  important,  and  stayed 
talking  to  Gandalf-jumped  to  their  feet  and  made  tall  piles  of  all  the  things.  Off 
they went, not waiting for trays, balancing columns of plates, each with a bottle on 
the  top,  with  one  hand,  while  the  hobbit  ran  after  them  almost  squeaking  with 
fright:  "please  be  careful!"  and  "please,  don't  trouble!  I  can  manage."  But  the 
dwarves only started to sing: 
 

Chip the glasses and crack the plates! 
Blunt the knives and bend the forks! 
That's what Bilbo Baggins hates- 
Smash the bottles and burn the corks! 
 
Cut the cloth and tread on the fat! 
Pour the milk on the pantry floor! 
Leave the bones on the bedroom mat! 

####-Splash the wine on every door! 
 
Dump the crocks in a boiling bawl; 
Pound them up with a thumping pole; 
And when you've finished, if any are whole, 
Send them down the hall to roll ! 
 
That's what Bilbo Baggins hates! 
So, carefully! carefully with the plates! 

 
And  of  course  they  did  none  of  these  dreadful  things,  and  everything  was 
cleaned  and  put  away  safe  as  quick  as  lightning,  while  the  hobbit  was  turning 
round  and  round  in  the middle of  the kitchen  trying  to  see what  they were doing. 
Then  they  went  back,  and  found  Thorin  with  his  feet  on  the  fender  smoking  a 
pipe. He was  blowing  the most  enormous  smoke-rings, and wherever he  told one 
to  go,  it  went-up  the  chimney,  or  behind  the  clock  on  the  man-telpiece,  or  under 
the  table,  or  round  and  round  the  ceiling;  but  wherever  it  went  it  was  not  quick 
enough  to escape Gandalf. Pop! he  sent a  smaller  smoke-ring from his short clay-
pipe  straight  through  each  one  of  Thorin's.  The  Gandalf's  smoke-ring  would  go 
green  and  come  back  to  hover  over  the  wizard's  head.  He  had  quite  a  cloud  of 
them  about  him  already,  and  in  the  dim  light  it  made  him  look  strange  and 
sorcerous. Bilbo stood still and watched-he loved smoke-rings-and then be blushed 
to think how proud he had been yesterday morning of the smoke-rings he had sent 
up the wind over The Hill. 
"Now for some music!" said Thorin. "Bring out the instruments!" 
Kili  and  Fili  rushed  for  their  bags  and  brought  back  little  fiddles; Dori, Nori, 
and Ori brought out flutes from somewhere inside their coats; Bombur produced a 
drum  from  the  hall; Bifur  and Bofur went  out  too,  and  came  back with  clarinets 
that they had left among the walking-sticks Dwalin and Balin said: "Excuse me, I 
left  mine  in  the  porch!"  "Just  bring  mine  in  with  you,"  said  Thorin.  They  came 
back with  viols  as  big  as  themselves,  and with  Thorin’s  harp wrapped  in  a  green 
cloth.  It was  a  beautiful  gold-en harp, and when Thorin struck it the music began 
all  at  once,  so  sudden  and  sweet  that Bilbo  forgot everything else, and was  swept 
away  into dark  lands under  strange moons,  far over The Water and very  far  from 
his hobbit-hole under The Hill. 
The dark came into the room from the little window that opened in the side of 
The  Hill;  the  firelight  flickered-it  was  April-and  still  they  played  on,  while  the 
shadow of Gandalf's beard wagged against the wall. 

####-The  dark  filled  all  the  room,  and  the  fire  died  down,  and  the  shadows  were 
lost,  and  still  they  played  on.  And  suddenly  first  one  and  then  another  began  to 
sing  as  they  played,  deep-throated  singing  of  the  dwarves  in  the  deep  places  of 
their ancient homes; and this is like a fragment of their song, if it can be like their 
song without their music. 
 

Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must away ere break of day 
To seek the pale enchanted gold. 
 
The dwarves of yore made mighty spells, 
While hammers fell like ringing bells 
In places deep, where dark things sleep, 
In hollow halls beneath the fells. 
 
For ancient king and elvish lord  
There many a gloaming golden hoard  
They shaped and wrought, and light they caught 
To hide in gems on hilt of sword. 
 
On silver necklaces they strung 
The flowering stars, on crowns they hung 
The dragon-fire, in twisted wire  
They meshed the light of moon and sun. 
 
Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must away, ere break of day,  
To claim our long-forgotten gold. 
 
Goblets they carved there for themselves 
And harps of gold; where no man delves 
There lay they long, and many a song 
Was sung unheard by men or elves. 
 
The pines were roaring on the height, 
The winds were moaning in the night. 
The fire was red, it flaming spread; 
The trees like torches biased with light, 
 
The bells were ringing in the dale 
And men looked up with faces pale; 

####-The dragon's ire more fierce than fire  
Laid low their towers and houses frail. 
 
The mountain smoked beneath the moon; 
The dwarves, they heard the tramp of doom. 
They fled their hall to dying -fall 
Beneath his feet, beneath the moon. 
 
Far over the misty mountains grim 
To dungeons deep and caverns dim 
We must away, ere break of day,  
To win our harps and gold from him! 

 
As they sang the hobbit felt the love of beautiful things made by hands and by 
cunning and by magic moving through him, a fierce and jealous love, the desire of 
the  hearts  of  dwarves.  Then  something  Tookish  woke  up  inside  him,  and  he 
wished  to  go  and  see  the  great  mountains,  and  hear  the  pine-trees  and  the 
waterfalls, and explore the caves, and wear a sword instead of a walking-stick. He 
looked  out  of  the  window.  The  stars  were  out  in  a  dark  sky  above  the  trees.  He 
thought  of  the  jewels  of  the  dwarves  shining  in  dark  caverns.  Suddenly  in  the 
wood  beyond  The  Water  a  flame  leapt  up--probably  somebody  lighting  a  wood-
fire-and he thought of plundering dragons settling on his quiet Hill and kindling it 
all  to  flames. He  shuddered;  and  very  quickly  he was  plain Mr.  Baggins  of  Bag-
End, Under-Hill, again. 
He got up trembling. He had less than half a mind to fetch the lamp, and more 
than  half  a  mind  to  pretend  to,  and  go  and  hide  behind  the  beer  barrels  in  the 
cellar,  and  not  come  out  again  until  all  the  dwarves  had  gone  away. Suddenly  he 
found that the music and the singing had stopped, and they were all looking at him 
with eyes shining in the dark. 
"Where  are  you  going?"  said  Thorin,  in  a  tone  that  seemed  to  show  that  he 
guessed both halves of the hobbit's mind. 
"What about a little light?" said Bilbo apologetically.  
"We like the dark," said the dwarves. "Dark for dark business! There are many 
hours before dawn." 
"Of  course!"  said Bilbo,  and  sat down  in  a hurry. He missed  the  stool  and  sat 
in the fender, knocking over the poker and shovel with a crash. 
"Hush!" said Gandalf. "Let Thorin speak!" And this is bow Thorin began. 
"Gandalf,  dwarves  and Mr. Baggins! We  are  not  together  in  the  house  of  our 
friend  and  fellow  conspirator,  this  most  excellent  and  audacious  hobbit-may  the 

####-hair  on  his  toes  never  fall  out!  all  praise  to  his  wine  and  ale!-"  He  paused  for 
breath  and  for  a  polite  remark  from  the  hob-bit,  but  the  compliments were  quite 
lost on-poor Bilbo Baggins, who was wagging his mouth in protest at being called 
audacious  and worst  of  all  fellow  conspirator,  though  no  noise  came  out,  he was 
so flummoxed. So Thorin went on: 
"We  are  met  to  discuss  our  plans,  our  ways,  means,  policy  and  devices.  We 
shall soon before the break of day start on our long journey, a journey from which 
some  of  us,  or  perhaps  all  of  us  (except  our  friend  and  counsellor,  the  ingenious 
wizard Gandalf) may never return. It is a solemn moment. Our object is, I take it, 
well known  to us all. To  the estimable Mr. Baggins, and perhaps  to one or  two of 
the  younger  dwarves  (I  think  I  should  be  right  in  naming  Kili  and  Fili,  for 
instance), the exact situation at the moment may require a little brief explanation-" 
This was  Thorin's  style. He was  an  important  dwarf.  If  he  had  been  allowed, 
he  would  probably  have  gone  on  like  this  until  he  was  out  of  breath,  without 
telling  any  one  there  'anything  that  was  not  known  already.  But  he  was  rudely 
interrupted. Poor Bilbo couldn't bear  it any  longer. At may never  return he began 
to feel a shriek coming up  inside, and very soon  it burst out  like  the whistle of an 
engine coming out of a tunnel. All the dwarves sprang Bp knocking over the table. 
Gandalf struck a blue  light on  the end of his magic staff, and  in  its firework glare 
the poor little hobbit could be seen kneeling on the hearth-rug, shaking like a jelly 
that was melting. Then he fell flat on  the floor, and kept on calling out  "struck by 
lightning,  struck  by  lightning!"  over  and  over  again;  and  that  was  all  they  could 
get  out  of  him  for  a  long  time.  So  they  took  him  and  laid  him  out  of  the way  on 
the drawing-room sofa with a drink at his elbow, and they went back to their dark 
business. 
"Excitable  little  fellow,"  said  Gandalf,  as  they  sat  down  again.  "Gets  funny 
queer  fits,  but  he  is  one  of  the  best,  one  of  the  best-as  fierce  as  a  dragon  in  a 
pinch." 
If  you  have  ever  seen  a  dragon  in  a  pinch,  you will  realize  that  this was  only 
poetical  exaggeration  applied  to  any  hobbit,  even  to Old Took's  great-granduncle 
Bullroarer, who was so huge (for a hobbit)  that he could ride a horse. He charged 
the  ranks  of  the  goblins  of  Mount  Gram  in  the  Battle  of  the  Green  Fields,  and 
knocked  their  king  Gol-firnbul's  head  clean  off  with  a  wooden  club.  It  sailed  a 
hundred  yards  through  the  air  and  went  down  a  rabbit  hole,  and  in  this  way  the 
battle was won and the game of Golf invented at the same moment. 
In the meanwhile, however, Bullroarer's gentler descendant was reviving in the 
drawing-room.  After  a  while  and  a  drink  he  crept  nervously  to  the  door  of  the 

####-parlour. This is what he heard, Gloin speaking: "Humph!" (or some snort more or 
less  like  that).  "Will  he  do,  do  you  think?  It  is  all  very  well  for Gandalf  to  talk 
about  this hobbit being  fierce, but one  shriek  like  that  in a moment of excitement 
would be enough  to wake  the dragon and all his  relatives, and kill  the  lot of us.  I 
think it sounded more like fright than excitement! In fact, if it bad not been for the 
sign  on  the  door,  I  should  have  been  sure  we  had  come  to  the  wrong  house.  As 
soon  as  I  clapped  eyes  on  the  little  fellow  bobbing  and  puffing  on  the mat,  I  had 
my doubts. He looks more like a grocer-than a burglar!" 
Then Mr. Baggins  turned  the handle and went in. The Took side had won. He 
suddenly  felt  he would  go without  bed  and  breakfast  to  be  thought  fierce. As  for 
little  fellow  bobbing  on  the  mat  it  almost  made  him  really  fierce.  Many  a  time 
afterwards  the  Baggins  part  regretted  what  he  did  now,  and  he  said  to  himself: 
"Bilbo, you were a fool; you walked right in and put your foot in it." 
"Pardon me," he said, "if I have overheard words that you were saying. I don't 
pretend  to  understand  what  you  are  talking  about,  or  your  reference  to  burglars, 
but  I  think  I  am  right  in  believing"  (this  is  what  he  called  being  on  his  dignity) 
"that you  think  I am no good.  I will show you.  I have no signs on my door-it was 
painted  a  week  ago-,  and  I  am quite  sure you have  come  to  the wrong house. As 
soon as  I  saw  your  funny  faces  on  the  door-step,  I had my doubts. But  treat  it as 
the right one. Tell me what you want done, and I will try it, if I have to walk from 
here  to  the East of East and fight  the wild Were-worms in the Last Desert. I bad a 
great-great-great-granduncle once, Bullroarer Took, and —" 
"Yes, yes, but  that was  long ago," said Gloin. "I was  talking about you. And I 
assure  you  there  is  a  mark  on  this  door-the  usual  one  in  the  trade,  or used  to be. 
Burglar  wants  a  good  job,  plenty  of  Excitement  and  reasonable  Reward,  that's 
how  it  is  usually  read.  You  can  say  Expert  Treasure-hunter  instead of Burglar  if 
you like. Some of them do. It's all the same to us. Gandalf told us that there was a 
man of  the  sort  in  these parts  looking  for  a  Job  at once,  and  that he had arranged 
for a meeting here this Wednesday tea-time." 
"Of course there is a mark," said Gandalf. "I put it there myself. For very good 
reasons. You asked me to find the fourteenth man for your expedition, and I chose 
Mr. Baggins.  Just  let  any one say I chose the wrong man or the wrong house, and 
you can stop at  thirteen and have all  the bad  luck you  like, or go back  to digging 
coal." 
He  scowled  so  angrily  at Gloin  that  the  dwarf  huddled  back  in  his  chair;  and 
when  Bilbo  tried  to  open  his  mouth  to  ask  a  question,  he  turned  and  frowned  at 
him and stuck oat his bushy eyebrows, till Bilbo shut his mouth tight with a snap. 

####-"That's  right,"  said  Gandalf.  "Let's  have  no  more  argument.  I  have  chosen  Mr. 
Baggins  and  that  ought  to  !6te  enough  for  all  of  you.  If  I  say  he  is  a  Burglar,  a 
Burglar he is, or will be when the time comes. There is a lot more in him than you 
guess,  and  a  deal  more  than  he  has  any  idea  of  himself.  You  may  (possibly)  all 
live to thank me yet. Now Bilbo, my boy, fetch the lamp, and let's have little light 
on this!" 
On  the  table  in  the  light  of  a  big  lamp  with  a  red  shad  he  spread  a  piece  of 
parchment rather like a map. 
"This was made  by  Thror,  your  grandfather,  Thorin,  he  said  in  answer  to  the 
dwarves' excited questions. "It is a plan of the Mountain." 
"I  don't  see  that  this  will  help  us  much,"  said  Thorin  disappointedly  after  a 
glance. "I remember the Mountain well enough and the lands about it. And I know 
where Mirkwood is, and the Withered Heath where the great dragons bred." 
"There  is  a dragon marked  in  red on  the Mountain,  said Balin,  "but  it will be 
easy enough to find him without that, if ever we arrive there." 
"There  is one point  that you haven't noticed,"  said  the wizard,  "and  that  is  the 
secret  entrance.  You  see  that  rune  on  the  West  side,  and  the  hand  pointing  to  it 
from the other runes?** That marks a hidden passage to the Lower Halls. 
"It may  have  been  secret  once,"  said  Thorin,  "but  how  do  we  know  that  it  is 
secret  any  longer?  Old  Smaug  had  lived  there  long  enough  now  to  find  out 
anything there is to know about those caves." 
"He may-but he can't have used it for years and years. "Why?" 
"Because  it  is  too  small.  'Five  feet  high  the  door  and  three may walk  abreast' 
say  the  runes,  but  Smaug  could  not  creep  into  a  hole  that  size,  not even when he 
was  a  young  dragon,  certainly  not  after  devouring  so  many  of  the  dwarves  and 
men of Dale." 
"It  seems  a  great  big  hole  to me,"  squeaked Bilbo  (who  had  no  experience  of 
dragons  and  only  of  hobbit-holes) He was getting excited and  interested  again, so 
that he forgot to keep his mouth shut. He loved maps, and in his hall there hung a 
large  one  of  the  Country  Round with  all  his  favourite walks marked  on  it  in  red 
ink.  "How  could  such  a  large  door  be  kept  secret  from  everybody  outside,  apart 
from the dragon?" he asked. He was only a little hobbit you must remember.  
"In lots of ways," said Gandalf. "But in what way this one has been hidden we 
don't  know  without  going  to  see.  From  what  it  says  on  the  map  I  should  guess 
there  is  a  closed  door  which  has  been  made  to  look  exactly  like  the  side  of  the 

                                                             
** Look at the maps with this book, and you will see the runes there. 

 

####-Mountain. That is the usual dwarves' method- I think that is right, isn't it?" "Quite 
right," said Thorin. 
"Also," went on Gandalf, "I forgot  to mention  that with  the map went a key, a 
small and curious key. Here it is!" he said, and handed to Thorin a key with a long 
barrel and intricate wards, made of silver. "Keep it safe!" 
"Indeed  I  will,"  said  Thorin,  and  he  fastened  it  upon  a  fine  chain  that  hung 
about his neck and under his jacket. "Now things begin to look more hopeful. This 
news alters them much for-the better. So far we have had no clear idea what to do. 
We  thought  of  going  East,  as  quiet  and  careful  as  we  could,  as  far  as  the  Long 
Lake. After that the trouble would begin." 
"A long time before that, if I know anything about the loads East," interrupted 
Gandalf. 
"We might go from there up along the River Running," went on Thorin taking 
no  notice,  "and  so  to  the  ruins  of Dale-the old  town  in  the valley  there, under  the 
shadow  of  the Mountain. But we  none of us liked the idea of the Front Gate. The 
river  runs  right out of  it  through  the great  cliff  at  the South of  the Mountain,  and 
out of it comes the dragon too-far too often, unless he has changed." 
"That  would  be  no  good,"  said  the  wizard,  "not  without  a  mighty  Warrior, 
even  a  Hero.  I  tried  to  find  one;  but  warriors  are  busy  fighting  one  another  in 
distant  lands,  and  in  this  neighbourhood  heroes  are  scarce,  or  simply  lot  to  be 
found.  Swords  in  these  parts  are  mostly  blunt,  and  axes  are  used  for  trees,  and 
shields  as  cradles  or  dish-covers;  and  dragons  are  comfortably  far-off  (and 
therefore  legendary).  That  is  why  I  settled  on  burglary-especially  when  I 
remembered the existence of a Side-door. And here is our little Bilbo Baggins, the 
burglar,  the  chosen  and  selected  burglar.  So  now  let's  get  on  and  make  some 
plans." 
"Very  well  then,"  said  Thorin,  "supposing  the  burglar-expert  gives  us  some 
ideas or suggestions." He turned with mock-politeness to Bilbo. 
"First  I  should  like  to  know  a  bit  more  about  things,"  said  he,  feeling  all 
confused and a bit shaky inside, but so far still lookishly determined to go on with 
things.  "I mean  about  the  gold  and  the  dragon,  and  all  that,  and  how  it  got  there, 
and who it belongs to, and so on and further." 
"Bless  me!"  said  Thorin,  "haven't  you  got  a  map?  and  didn't  you  hear  our 
song? and haven't we been talking about all this for hours?" 
"All  the  same,  I  should  like  it  all plain  and  clear,"  said he obstinately, putting 
on  his  business  manner  (usually  reserved  for  people  who  tried  to  borrow money 
off him),  and doing his best  to  appear wise  and prudent  and professional  and  live 

####-up  to Gandalf's  recommendation. "Also  I  should  like  to know about  risks, out-of-
pocket  expenses,  time  required  and  remuneration,  and  so  forth"-by  which  he 
meant: "What am I going to get out of it? and am I going to come back alive?" 
"O  very  well,"  said  Thorin.  "Long  ago  in  my  grandfather  Thror's  time  our 
family  was  driven  out  of  the  far  North,  and  came  back  with  all  their  wealth  and 
their tools to this Mountain on the map. It had been discovered by my far ancestor, 
Thrain the Old, but now they mined and they tunnelled and they made huger halls 
and greater workshops  -and  in  addition  I  believe  they  found  a  good  deal  of  gold 
and a great many  jewels  too. Anyway they grew immensely rich and famous, and 
my  grandfather  was  King  under  the  Mountain  again  and  treated  with  great 
reverence  by  the  mortal  men,  who  lived  to  the  South,  and  were  gradually 
spreading  up  the  Running  River  as  far  as  the  valley  overshadowed  by  the 
Mountain.  They  built  the merry  town  of  Dale  there  in  those  days.  Kings  used  to 
send  for  our  smiths,  and  reward  even  the  least  skilful most  richly.  Fathers would 
beg  us  to  take  their  sons  as  apprentices,  and  pay  us  handsomely,  especially  in 
food-supplies, which we  never  bothered  to  grow  or  find  for  ourselves. Altogether 
those were good days for us, and the poorest of us had money to spend and to lend, 
and leisure to make beautiful things just for the. fun of it, not to speak of the most 
marvellous  and  magical  toys,  the  like  of  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  world 
now-a-days.  So  my  grandfather's  halls  became  full  of  armour  and  jewels  and 
carvings and cups, and the toy-market of Dale was the wonder of the North. 
"Undoubtedly  that  was  what  brought  the  dragon.  Dragons  steal  gold  and 
jewels, you know, from men and elves and dwarves, wherever they can find them; 
and  they  guard  their  plunder  as  long  as  they  live  (which  is  practically  forever, 
unless they are killed), and never enjoy a brass ring of it. Indeed they hardly know 
a  good  bit  of  work  from  a  bad,  though  they  usually  have  a  good  notion  of  the 
current market value; and they can't make a thing for themselves, not even mend a 
little  loose  scale of  their armour. There were  lots of dragons  in  the North  in  those 
days, and gold was probably getting scarce up there, with the dwarves flying south 
or  getting  killed,  and  all  the  general  waste  and  destruction  that  dragons  make 
going  from  bad  to  worse.  There  was  a  most  specially  greedy,  strong  and  wicked 
worm called Smaug. One day he flew up into the air and came south. The first we 
heard of  it was a noise  like a hurricane coming from  the North, and  the pine-trees 
on  the  Mountain  creaking  and  cracking  in  the  wind.  Some  of  the  dwarves  who 
happened  to  be  outside  (I  was  one  luckily  -a  fine  adventurous  lad  in  those  days, 
always wandering about, and it saved my life that day)-well, from a good way off 
we saw the dragon settle on our mountain in a spout of flame. Then he came down 

####-the slopes and when he reached the woods they all went up in fire. By that time all 
the bells were  ringing  in Dale and  the warriors were arming. The dwarves  rushed 
out  of  their  great  gate;  but  there was  the  dragon waiting  for  them. None  escaped 
that way.  The  river  rushed  up  in  steam  and  a  fog  fell  on Dale, and  in  the  fog  the 
dragon came on them and destroyed most of the warriors-the usual unhappy story, 
it was only too common in those days. Then he went back and crept in through the 
Front  Gate  and  routed  out  all  the  halls,  and  lanes,  and  tunnels,  alleys,  cellars, 
mansions  and passages. After  that  there were no dwarves  left  alive  inside,  and he 
took  all  their  wealth  for  himself.  Probably,  for  that  is  the  dragons'  way,  he  has 
piled it all up in a great heap far inside, and sleeps on it for a bed. Later he used to 
crawl  out  of  the  great  gate  and  come  by  night  to  Dale,  and  carry  away  people, 
especially maidens, to eat, until Dale was ruined, and all the people dead or gone. 
What goes on there now I don't know for certain, but I don't suppose anyone lives 
nearer to the Mountain than the far edge of the Long Lake now-a-days. 
"The  few  of  us  that  were  well  outside  sat  and  wept  in  hiding,  and  cursed 
Smaug;  and  there we were unexpectedly  joined by my  father  and my grandfather 
with singed beards. They looked very grim but they said very little. When I asked 
how  they had got away,  they  told me  to hold my  tongue, and said  that one day  in 
the proper time I should know. After that we went away, and we have had to earn 
our  livings  as  best we  could  up  and  down  the  lands,  often enough sinking as  low 
as  blacksmith-work  or  even  coalmining.  But  we  have  never  forgotten  our  stolen 
treasure. And even now, when I will allow we have a good bit laid by and are not 
so  badly  off"-here Thorin  stroked  the gold  chain  round his neck-"we still mean to 
get it back, and to bring our curses home to Smaug-if we can. 
"I  have  often  wondered  about  my  father's  and  my  grandfather's  escape.  I  see 
now  they  must  have  had  a  private  Side-door  which  only  they  knew  about.  But 
apparently  they made a map, and  I  should  like  to know how Gandalf got hold of 
it, and why it did not come down to me, the rightful heir." 
"I did not 'get hold of it,' I was given it," said the wizard. 
"Your grandfather Thror was killed, you  remember,  in  the mines of Moria by 
Azog the Goblin —" 
"Curse his name, yes," said Thorin. 
"And  Thrain  your  father  went  away  on  the  twenty-first  of  April,  a  hundred 
years ago last Thursday, and has never been seen by you since—" 
"True, true," said Thorin. 
"Well,  your  father  gave me  this  to  give  to  you;  and  if  I have  chosen my own 
time and way of handing it over, you can hardly blame me, considering the trouble 

####-I had to find you. Your father could not remember his own name when he gave me 
the  paper,  and  he  never  told  me  yours;  so  on  the  whole  I  think  I  ought  to  be 
praised and thanked. Here it is," said he handing the map to Thorin. 
"I don't understand," said Thorin, and Bilbo felt he would have liked to say the 
same. The explanation did not seem to explain. 
"Your  grandfather,"  said  the  wizard  slowly  and  grimly,  "gave  the map  to  his 
son for safety before he went  to  the mines of Moria. Your father went away  to  try 
his  luck with  the map after your grandfather was killed; and  lots of adventures of 
a  most  unpleasant  sort  he  had,  but  he  never  got  near  the  Mountain. How  he  got 
there  I  don't  know,  but  I  found  him  a  prisoner  in  the  dungeons  of  the 
Necromancer." 
"Whatever  were  you  doing  there?"  asked  Thorin  with  a  shudder,  and  all  the 
dwarves shivered. 
"Never  you  mind.  I  was  finding  things  out,  as  usual;  and  a  nasty  dangerous 
business it was. Even I, Gandalf, only just escaped. I tried to save your father, but 
it  was  too  late.  He  was  witless  and  wandering,  and  had  forgotten  almost 
everything  except  the  map  and  the  key."  "We  have  long  ago  paid  the  goblins  of 
Moria,"  said  Thorin;  "we  must  give  a  thought  to  the  Necromancer."  "Don't  be 
absurd! He is an enemy quite beyond the powers of all the dwarves put together, if 
they could all be collected again from the four corners of the world. The one thing 
your  father  wished  was  for  his  son  to  read  the map  and  use  the  key.  The  dragon 
and the Mountain are more than big enough tasks for you!" 
"Hear, hear!" said Bilbo, and accidentally said  it aloud, "Hear what?"  they all 
said  turning  suddenly  towards  him,  and  he  was  so  flustered  that  he  answered 
"Hear what I have got to say!" "What's that?" they asked. 
"Well, I should say that you ought to go East and have a look round. After all 
there  is  the Side-door, and dragons must sleep sometimes, I suppose. If you sit on 
the  doorstep  long  enough,  I daresay you will  think of  something. And well, don't 
you  know,  I  think  we  have  talked  long  enough  for  one  night,  if  you  see  what  I 
mean.  What  about  bed,  and  an  early  start,  and  all  that?  I  will  give  you  a  good 
breakfast before you go." 
"Before  we  go,  I  suppose  you  mean,"  said  Thorin.  "Aren't  you  the  burglar? 
And isn't sitting on the door-step your job, not to speak of getting inside the door? 
But  I agree about bed and breakfast.  I  like eggs with my ham, when starting on a 
journey: fried not poached, and mind you don't break 'em." 
After  all  the  others  had  ordered  their  breakfasts  without  so  much  as  a  please 
(which  annoyed  Bilbo  very much),  they  all  got  up.  The  hobbit  had  to  find  room 

####-for  them  all,  and  filled  all  his  spare-rooms  and  made  beds  on  chairs  and  sofas, 
before  he  got  them  all  stowed  and  went  to  his  own  little  bed  very  tired  and  not 
altogether  happy. One  thing  he  did make  his mind  up  about was  not  to  bother  to 
get up very early and cook everybody else's wretched breakfast. The Tookishness 
was  wearing  off,  and  he  was  not  now  quite  so  sure  that  he  was  going  on  any 
journey  in  the morning.  As  he  lay  in  bed  he  could  hear  Thorin  still  humming  to 
himself in the best bedroom next to him: 
 

Far over the misty mountains cold  
To dungeons deep and caverns old  
We must away, ere break of day,  
To find our long-forgotten gold. 

 
Bilbo went  to  sleep with  that  in  his  ears,  and  it  gave  him  very  uncomfortable 
dreams. It was long after the break of day, when he woke up. 

####-Chapter 2
<br>
Roast Mutton 
<br>
 
Up jumped Bilbo, and putting on his dressing-gown went into the dining-room. 
There he saw nobody, but all the signs of a large and hurried breakfast. There was 
a  fearful  mess  in  the  room,  and  piles  of  unwashed  crocks  in  the  kitchen.  Nearly 
every pot and pan he possessed seemed to have been used. The washing-up was so 
dismally real that Bilbo was forced to believe the party of the night before had not 
been part of his bad dreams, as he had rather hoped. Indeed he was really relieved 
after  all  to  think  that  they  had  all  gone  without  him,  and  without  bothering  to 
wake him up ("but with never a thank-you" he thought); and yet in a way he could 
not help feeling just a trifle disappointed. The feeling surprised him. 
"Don't be a fool, Bilbo Baggins!" he said  to himself, "thinking of dragons  and 
all  that  outlandish  nonsense  at  your  age!"  So  be  put  on  an  apron,  lit  fires,  boiled 
water,  and  washed  up.  Then  he  had  a  nice  little  breakfast  in  the  kitchen  before 
turning  out  the  dining-room. By  that  time  the sun was shining; and  the front door 
was  open,  letting  in  a  warm  spring  breeze.  Bilbo  began  to  whistle  loudly  and  to 
forget about the night before. In fact he was just sitting down to a nice little second 
breakfast  in  the  dining-room by  the open window, when  in walked Gandalf.  "My 
dear  fellow,"  said  he,  "whenever  are  you  going  to  come?  What  about  an  early 
start?-and here you are having breakfast, or whatever you call  it, at half past  ten! 
They left you the message, because they could not wait." 
"What message?" said poor Mr. Baggins all in a fluster.  
"Great Elephants!" said Gandalf, "you are not at all yourself this morning-you 
have never dusted the mantel- piece!" 
"What's  that  got  to  do  with  it?  I  have  had  enough  to  do  with  washing  up  for 
fourteen!" 
"If  you  had  dusted  the  mantelpiece  you  would  have  found  this  just under  the 
clock,"  said  Gandalf,  handing  Bilbo  a  note  (written,  of  course,  on  his  own  note-
paper). 
This is what he read: 
 

"Thorin and Company to Burglar Bilbo greeting! 
For  your  hospitality  our  sincerest  thanks,  and  for  your  offer  of 
professional assistance our grateful acceptance. Terms: cash on delivery, up to 
and  not  exceeding  one  fourteenth  of  total  profits  (if  any);  all  traveling 

####-expenses  guaranteed  in  any  event;  funeral  expenses  to  be  defrayed  by  us  or 
our representatives, if occasion arises and the matter is not otherwise arranged 
for. 
"Thinking  it  unnecessary  to  disturb  your  esteemed  repose,  we  have 
proceeded  in  advance  to  make  requisite  preparations,  and  shall  await  your 
respected person at the Green Dragon Inn, Bywater, at II a.m. sharp. Trusting 
that you will be punctual. 
 
"We have the honour to remain 
                                  "Yours deeply 
                                              "Thorin& Co." 

 
"That leaves you just ten minutes. You will have to run," said Gandalf. 
"But—" said Bilbo. 
"No time for it," said the wizard. 
"But—"said Bilbo again. 
"No time for that either! Off you go!" 
To  the  end  of  his  days  Bilbo  could  never  remember  how  he  found  himself 
outside,  without  a  hat,  walking-stick  or  say  money,  or  anything  that  he  usually 
took  when  he  went  out;  leaving  his  second  breakfast  half-finished  and  quite 
unwashed-up,  pushing  his  keys  into  Gandalf's  hands,  and  running  as  fast  as  his 
furry  feet  could  carry  him  down  the  lane,  past  the  great Mill,  across  The Water, 
and then on for a whole mile or more. Very puffed he was, when he got to Bywater 
just  on  the  stroke  of  eleven,  and  found  he  had  come  without  a  pocket-
handkerchief! 
"Bravo!" said Balin who was standing at the inn door looking out for him. 
Just  then  all  the  others  came  round  the  corner  of  the  road  from  the  village. 
They were on ponies, and each pony was  slung about with all kinds of baggages, 
packages, parcels, and paraphernalia. There was a very small pony, apparently for 
Bilbo. 
"Up you two get, and off we go!" said Thorin. 
"I'm  awfully  sorry,"  said Bilbo,  "but  I  have  come without my  hat,  and  I  have 
left my pocket-handkerchief behind, and I haven't got any money. I didn't get your 
note until after 10.45 to be precise." 
"Don't  be  precise,"  said  Dwalin,  "and  don't  worry!  You will  have  to manage 
without pocket-handkerchiefs, and a good many other things, before you get to the 
journey's end. As for a hat, I have got a spare hood and cloak in my luggage." 

####-That's  how  they  all  came  to  start,  jogging  off  from  the  inn  one  fine  morning 
just  before  May,  on  laden  ponies;  and  Bilbo  was  wearing  a  dark-green  hood  (a 
little  weather-stained)  and  a  dark-green cloak borrowed  from Dwalin. They were 
too large for him, and he looked rather comic. What his father Bungo would have 
thought of him, I daren't think. His only comfort was he couldn't be mistaken for a 
dwarf, as he had no beard. 
They had not been riding very long when up came Gandalf very splendid on a 
white  horse.  He  had  brought  a  lot  of  pocket-handkerchiefs,  and Bilbo's  pipe  and 
tobacco.  So  after  that  the  party  went  along  very  merrily,  and  they  told  stories  or 
sang  songs  as  they  rode  forward  all  day,  except  of  course  when  they  stopped  for 
meals. These didn't  come quite  as often  as Bilbo would have  liked  them, but  still 
he began to feel that adventures were not so bad after all. At  first they had passed 
through  hobbit-lands,  a  wild  respectable  country  inhabited  by  decent  folk,  with 
good  roads,  an  inn  or  two,  and  now  and  then  a  dwarf  or  a  farmer  ambling  by  on 
business.  Then  they  came  to  lands where people  spoke  strangely,  and  sang  songs 
Bilbo  had  never  heard  before.  Now  they  had  gone  on  far  into  the  Lone-lands, 
where  there were  no  people  left,  no  inns,  and  the  roads  grew  steadily worse. Not 
far  ahead were  dreary  hills,  rising  higher  and  higher, dark with trees. On some of 
them  were  old  castles  with  an  evil  look,  as  if  they  had  been  built  by  wicked 
people.  Everything  seemed  gloomy,  for  the  weather  that  day  had  taken  a  nasty 
turn. Mostly  it  had  been  as  good  as May  can  be,  even  in  merry  tales, but now  it 
was  cold  and  wet.  In  the  Lone-lands  they  had  to  camp  when  they  could,  but  at 
least  it  had  been  dry.  "To  think  it  will  soon  be  June,"  grumbled  Bilbo  as  he 
splashed  along  behind  the  others  in  a  very  muddy  track.  It  was  after  tea-time;  it 
was  pouring with  rain, and had been all day; his hood was dripping  into his eyes, 
his cloak was full of water;  the pony was  tired and stumbled on stones;  the others 
were  too  grumpy  to  talk.  "And  I'm  sure  the  rain  has  got  into  the  dry  clothes  and 
into  the  food-bags," thought Bilbo. "Bother burgling and everything to do with it! 
I wish  I was at home  in my nice hole by  the  fire, with  the kettle  just beginning  to 
sing!" It was not the last time that he wished that! 
Still  the  dwarves  jogged  on,  never  turning  round  or  taking  any  notice  of  the 
hobbit.  Somewhere  behind  the  grey  clouds  the  sun  must  have  gone  down,  for  it 
began  to  get  dark.  Wind  got  up,  and  the  willows  along  the  river-bank  bent  and 
sighed. I don't know what river it was, a rushing red one, swollen with the rains of 
the  last  few  days,  that  came  down  from  the  hills  and mountains  in  front  of  them. 
Soon it was nearly dark. The winds broke up the grey clouds, and a waning moon 
appeared  above  the  hills  between  the  flying  rags.  Then  they  stopped,  and  Thorin 

####-muttered  something  about  supper,  "and  where  shall  we  get  a  dry  patch  to  sleep 
on?" Not until  then did  they notice  that Gandalf was missing. So far he had come 
all  the way with  them, never  saying  if he was  in  the adventure or merely keeping 
them  company  for  a  while.  He  had  eaten  most,  talked  most,  and  laughed  most. 
But now he simply was not there at all! 
"Just  when  a  wizard  would  have  been  most  useful,  too,"  groaned  Dori  and 
Nori  (who  shared  the hobbit's views about  regular meals, plenty and often). They 
decided in  the end that they would have to camp where they were. So far they had 
not  camped  before  on  this  journey,  and  though  they  knew  that  they  soon  would 
have to camp regularly, when they were among the Misty Mountains and far from 
the  lands  of  respectable  people,  it  seemed  a  bad  wet  evening  to  begin,  on.  They 
moved to a clump of trees, and though it was drier under them, the wind shook the 
rain  off  the  leaves,  and  the  drip,  drip,  was  most  annoying.  Also  the  mischief 
seemed to have got into the fire. Dwarves can make a fire almost anywhere out of 
almost anything, wind or no wind; but they could not do it that night, not even Oin 
and Gloin, who were specially good at it. 
Then one of  the ponies  took  fright at nothing and bolted. He got  into  the  river 
before they could catch him; and before they could get him out again, Fili and Kili 
were  nearly  drowned,  and  all  the  baggage  that  he  carried  was  washed  away  off 
him. Of course it was mostly food, and there was mighty little left for supper, and 
less  for  breakfast.  There  they  all  sat  glum  and wet  and muttering, while Oin  and 
Gloin  went  on  trying  to  light  the  fire,  and  quarrelling  about  it.  Bilbo  was  sadly 
reflecting  that  adventures  are  not  all  pony-rides  in  May-sunshine,  when  Balin, 
who was  always  their  look-out man, said:  "There's a light over there!" There was 
a hill  some way off with  trees on  it, pretty  thick  in parts. Out of  the dark mass of 
the  trees  they  could  now  see  a  light  shining,  a  reddish  comfortable-looking light, 
as  it  might  be  a  fire  or  torches  twinkling.  When  they  had  looked  at  it  for  some 
while,  they  fell  to  arguing.  Some  said  "no"  and  some  said  "yes."  Some  said  they 
could but go and see, and anything was better than little supper, less breakfast, and 
wet  clothes  all  the  night. Others  said:  "These  parts  are  none  too well known, and 
are  too  near  the mountains. Travellers  seldom  come  this way  now. The  old maps 
are  no  use:  things  have  changed  for  the  worse  and  the  road  is  unguarded.    They 
have seldom even heard of the king round here, and the less inquisitive you are as 
you  go  along,  the  less  trouble  you  are  likely  to  find."  Some  said:  "After  all  there 
are  fourteen  of  us."  Others  said:  "Where  has  Gandalf  got  to?"  This  remark  was 
repeated  by  everybody.  Then  the  rain  began  to  pour  down  worse  than  ever,  and 
Oin and Gloin began to fight. That settled it. "After all we have got a burglar with 

####-us,"  they said; and so  they made off,  leading  their ponies (with all due and proper 
caution)  in  the  direction  of  the  light.  They  came  to  the  hill  and  were  soon  in  the 
wood.  Up  the  hill  they  went;  but  there  was  no  proper  path  to  be  seen,  such  as 
might  lead  to  a  house  or  a  farm;  and  do  what  they  could  they  made  a  deal  of 
rustling  and  crackling  and  creaking  (and  a good deal of grumbling  and drafting), 
as they went through the trees in the pitch dark. 
Suddenly  the  red  light  shone  out  very  bright  through  the  tree-trunks  not  far 
ahead.  "Now  it  is  the  burglar's  turn,"  they  said, meaning Bilbo.  "You must  go  on 
and  find  out  all  about  that  light,  and what  it  is  for,  and  if  all  is  perfectly  safe and 
canny," said Thorin to the hobbit. "Now scuttle off, and come back quick, if all is 
well.  If  not,  come  back  if  you  can!  It  you  can't,  hoot  twice  like  a  barn-owl and 
once like a screech-owl, and we will do what we can." 
Off Bilbo had  to go, before he  could explain that he could not hoot even once 
like  any  kind  of  owl  any  more  than  fly  like  a  bat.  But  at  any  rate  hobbits  can 
move quietly  in woods,  absolutely quietly. They  take  a pride  in  it,  and Bilbo had 
sniffed  more  than  once  at  what  he  called  "all  this dwarvish  racket," as  they went 
along,  though  I  don't  sup-pose  you  or  I  would  notice  anything  at  all  on  a  windy 
night,  not  if  the  whole  cavalcade  had  passed  two  feet  off.  As  for  Bilbo  walking 
primly  towards  the  red  light,  I  don't  suppose  even  a  weasel  would  have  stirred  a 
whisker  at  it.  So,  naturally,  he  got  right  up  to  the  fire-for  fire  it  was  without 
disturbing anyone. And this is what he saw. Three very large persons sitting round 
a  very  large  fire  of  beech-logs. They were  toasting mutton  on  long  spits of wood, 
and  licking  the  gravy  off  their  fingers.  There  was  a  fine  toothsome  smell.  Also 
there was a barrel of good drink at hand, and  they were drinking out of  jugs. But 
they were  trolls. Obviously  trolls.  Even Bilbo,  in  spite  of  his  sheltered  life,  could 
see  that:  from  the great heavy  faces of  them, and  their size, and  the shape of  their 
legs, not to mention their language, which was not drawing-room fashion at all, at 
all. 
"Mutton yesterday, mutton today, and blimey, if it don't look like mutton again 
tomorrer," said one of the trolls. 
"Never  a  blinking  bit  of  manflesh  have  we  had  for  long  enough,"  said  a 
second.  "What  the  'ell William was  a-thinkin' of to bring us into these parts at all, 
beats me  - and  the drink  runnin'  short, what's more," he  said  jogging the elbow of 
William, who was taking a pull at his jug. 
William  choked.  "Shut  yer  mouth!"  he  said  as  soon  as  he  could.  "Yer  can't 
expect  folk  to stop here  for ever  just  to be et by you and Bert. You've et a village 
and a half between yer, since we come down from the mountains. How much more 

####-d'yer want? And time's been up our way, when yer'd have said 'thank yer Bill' for a 
nice bit o'  fat valley mutton  like what  this  is." He  took a big bite off a  sheep's  leg 
he was toasting, and wiped his lips on his sleeve. 
Yes, I am afraid trolls do behave like that, even those with only one head each. 
After  hearing  all  this  Bilbo  ought  to  have  done  something  at  once.  Either  he 
should  have  gone  back  quietly  and  warned  his  friends  that  there  were  three  fair-
sized  trolls  at  hand  in  a  nasty  mood,  quite  likely  to  try  toasted  dwarf,  or  even 
pony,  for  a  change;  or  else  he  should  have  done  a  bit  of  good  quick  burgling.  A 
really  first-class  and  legendary  burglar would  at  this  point  have  picked  the  trolls' 
pockets-it  is  nearly  always  worthwhile  if  you  can  manage  it-,  pinched  the  very 
mutton off the spite, purloined the beer, and walked off without their noticing him. 
Others more practical but with less professional pride would perhaps have stuck a 
dagger  into  each  of  them  before  they observed  it. Then  the night could have been 
spent cheerily.  
Bilbo knew  it. He had  read of a good many  things he had never seen or done. 
He  was  very  much  alarmed,  as  well  as  disgusted;  he  wished  himself  a  hundred 
miles away, and yet-and yet somehow he could not go straight back to Thorin and 
Company empty-handed. So he stood and hesitated in the shadows. Of the various 
burglarious  proceedings  he  had  heard  of  picking  the  trolls'  pockets  seemed  the 
least difficult, so at last he crept behind a tree just behind William. 
Bert and Tom went off  to  the barrel. William was having another drink. Then 
Bilbo  plucked  up  courage  and  put  his  little  hand  in William's  enormous  pocket. 
There was a purse in it, as big as a bag to Bilbo. "Ha!" thought he warming to his 
new work as he lifted it carefully out, "this is a beginning!" 
It was! Trolls' purses are the mischief, and this was no exception. " 'Ere, 'oo are 
you?"  it  squeaked,  as  it  left  the  pocket;  and  William  turned  round  at  once  and 
grabbed Bilbo by the neck, before he could duck behind the tree. 
"Blimey, Bert, look what I've copped!" said William. 
"What is it?" said the others coming up. 
"Lumme, if I knows! What are yer?" 
"Bilbo  Baggins,  a  bur—  a  hobbit,"  said  poor  Bilbo,  shaking  all  over,  and 
wondering how to make owl-noises before they throttled him. 
"A  burrahobbit?"  said  they  a  bit  startled.  Trolls  are  slow  in  the  uptake,  and 
mighty suspicious about anything new to them. 
"What's a burrahobbit got to do with my pocket, anyways?" said William. 
"And can yer cook 'em?" said Tom. 
"Yer can try," said Bert, picking up a skewer.  

####-"He wouldn't make  above  a mouthful,"  said William, who  had  already  had  a 
fine supper, "not when he was skinned and boned." 
"P'raps  there  are more  like  him  round  about,  and we might make  a  pie,"  said 
Bert.  "Here  you,  are  there  any  more  of  your  sort  a-sneakin'  in  these  here woods, 
yer  nassty  little  rabbit,"  said  he  looking  at  the  hobbit's  furry  feet;  and  he  picked 
him up by the toes and shook him. 
"Yes,  lots,"  said  Bilbo,  before  he  remembered  not  to  give  his  friends  away. 
"No, none at all, not one," he said immediately afterwards. 
"What  d'yer  mean?"  said  Bert,  holding  him  right  away  up,  by  the  hair  this 
time. 
"What I say," said Bilbo gasping. "And please don't cook me, kind sirs! I am a 
good  cook myself,  and  cook  bet-ter  than  I cook,  if you  see what  I mean.  I'll cook 
beautifully for you, a perfectly beautiful breakfast for you, if only you won't have 
me for supper." 
"Poor  little blighter,"  said William. He had  already had  as much  supper  as he 
could hold; also he had had lots of beer. "Poor little blighter! Let him go!" 
"Not  till  he  says  what  he  means  by  lots  and  none  at  all,"  said  Bert.  "I  don't 
want to have me throat cut in me sleep. Hold his toes in the fire, till he talks!" 
"I won't have it," said William. "I caught him anyway." 
"You're a fat fool, William," said Bert, "as I've said afore this evening." 
"And you're a lout!" 
"And  I won't  take  that  from you. Bill Huggins,"  says Bert, and puts his  fist  in 
William's eye. 
Then  there  was  a  gorgeous  row.  Bilbo  had  just  enough  wits  left,  when  Bert 
dropped  him  on  the  ground,  to  scramble  out  of  the way  of  their  feet,  before  they 
were  fighting  like  dogs,  and  calling  one  another  all  sorts  of  perfectly  true  and 
applicable  names  in  very  loud  voices.  Soon  they  were  locked  in  one  another's 
arms,  and  rolling  nearly  into  the  fire  kicking  and  thumping, while Tom whacked 
at  then  both  with  a  branch  to  bring  them  to  their  senses-and  that  of  course  only 
made  them  madder  than  ever.  That  would  have  been  the  time  for  Bilbo  to  have 
left. But his poor  little  feet had been very  squashed  in Bert's big paw,  and he had 
no  breath  in  his  body,  and  his  head was  going  round;  so  there  he  lay  for  a while 
panting, just outside the circle of firelight. 
Right  in  the middle of  the  fight up  came Balin. The dwarves had heard noises 
from  a  distance,  and  after  wait-ing  for  some  time  for  Bilbo  to  come  back,  or  to 
hoot  like  an  owl,  they  started  off  one  by  one  to  creep  towards  the  light  as  quietly 
as  they  could.  No  sooner  did  Tom  see  Balin  come  into  the  light  than he gave an 

####-awful  howl.  Trolls  simply  detest  the  very  sight  of  dwarves  (uncooked).  Bert  and 
Bill  stopped  fighting  immediately,  and  "a  sack,  Tom,  quick!"  they  said,  before 
Balin,  who  was  wondering  where  in  all  this  commotion  Bilbo  was,  knew  what 
was happening, a sack was over his head, and he was down. 
"There's more  to come yet," said Tom, "or I'm mighty mistook. Lots and none 
at  all,  it  is,"  said  he.  "No  burra-  hobbits,  but  lots  of  these  here  dwarves.  That's 
about the shape of it!" 
"I reckon you 're right," said Bert, "and we'd best get out of the light." 
And  so  they  did.  With  sacks  in  their  hands,  that  they  used  for  carrying  off 
mutton and other plunder, they waited in the shadows. As each dwarf came up and 
looked  at  the  fire,  and  the  spilled  jugs,  and  the  gnawed mutton,  in  surprise,  pop! 
went  a  nasty  smelly  sack  over  his  head,  and  he  was  down.  Soon  Dwalin  lay  by 
Balin, and Fili and Kili together, and Dori and Nori and Ori all in a heap, and Oin 
and Gloin and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur piled uncomfortably near the fire. 
"That'll teach 'em," said Tom; for Bifur and Bombur had given a lot of trouble, 
and fought like mad, as dwarves will when cornered. 
Thorin  came  last-and  he  was  not  caught  unawares.  He  came  expecting 
mischief,  and  didn't  need  to  see  his  friends'  legs  sticking  out  of  sacks  to  tell  him 
that  things were  not  all well. He  stood  outside  in  the  shadows  some way  off,  and 
said: "What's all this trouble? Who has been knocking my people about?" 
"It's  trolls!"  said  Bilbo  from  behind  a  tree.  They  had  forgotten  all  about him. 
"They're hiding in the bushes with sacks," said he. 
"O!  are  they?"  said  Thorin,  and  he  jumped  forward  to  the  fire,  before  they 
could  leap on him. He caught up a big branch all on fire at one end; and Bert got 
that  end  in  his  eye before he could step aside. That put him out of  the battle  for a 
bit.  Bilbo  did  his  best.  He  caught  hold  of  Tom's  leg-as  well  as  he  could,  it  was 
thick  as  a  young  tree-trunk  -but  he  was  sent  spinning  up  into  the  top  of  some 
bushes, when Tom kicked the sparks up in Thorin's face. 
Tom got the branch in his teeth for that, and lost one of the front ones. It made 
him  howl,  I  can  tell  you.  But  just  at  that  moment  William  came  up  behind  and 
popped  a  sack  right  over  Thorin's  head  and  down  to  his  toes.  And  so  the  fight 
ended. A  nice  pickle  they were  all  in  now:  all  neatly  tied  up  in  sacks, with  three 
angry trolls (and two with burns and bashes to remember) sitting by them, arguing 
whether  they  should  roast  them  slowly,  or mince  them  fine  and  boil  them,  or  just 
sit on them one by one and squash them into jelly: and Bilbo up in a bush, with his 
clothes and his skin torn, not daring to move for fear they should hear him. 
 

####-It was  just  then  that Gandalf  came  back. But  no  one  saw  him. The  trolls  had 
just  decided  to  roast  the dwarves now and eat  them  later-that was Bert's idea, and 
after a lot of argument they had all agreed to it. 
"No  good  roasting  'em  now,  it’d  take  all  night,"  said  a  voice.  Bert  thought  it 
was William's. 
"Don't  start  the  argument  all  over-again.  Bill,"  he  said,  "or  it  will  take  all 
night." 
"Who's a-arguing?" said William, who thought it was. Bert that had spoken. 
"You are," said Bert. 
"You're  a  liar,"  said William;  and  so  the  argument  beg  all  over  again.  In  the 
end  they  decided  to  mince  them  fine  and  boil  them. So  they got  a black pot,  and 
they took out their knives. 
"No  good  boiling  'em! We  ain't  got  no  water,  and  it's  a  long  way  to  the  well 
and all," said a voice. Bert and William thought it was Tom's. 
"Shut  up!"  said  they,  "or  we'll  never  have  done.  And  yer  can  fetch  the water 
yerself, if yer say any more." 
"Shut  up  yerself!"  said  Tom,  who  thought  it  was  William's  voice.  "Who's 
arguing but you. I'd like to know." 
"You're a booby," said William. 
"Booby yerself!" said Tom. 
And  so  the  argument  began  all  over again, and went on hotter than ever, until 
at last they decided to sit on the sacks one by one and squash them, and boil them 
next time. 
"Who shall we sit on first?" said the voice. 
"Better sit on  the  last fellow first," said Bert, whose eye had been damaged by 
Thorin. He thought Tom was talking. 
"Don't talk to yerself!" said Tom. "But if you wants to sit on the last one, sit on 
him. Which is he?" 
"The one with the yellow stockings," said Bert. 
"Nonsense, the one with the grey stockings," said a voice like William's. 
"I made sure it was yellow," said Bert. 
"Yellow it was," said William. 
"Then what did yer say it was grey for?" said Bert. 
"I never did. Tom said it." 
"That I never did!" said Tom. "It was you." 
"Two to one, so shut yer mouth!" said Bert. 
"Who are you a-talkin' to?" said William. 

####-"Now  stop  it!"  said  Tom  and  Bert  together.  "The  night's  gettin'  on,  and  dawn 
comes early. Let's get on with it!" 
"Dawn  take  you  all,  and  be  stone  to  you!"  said  a  voice  that  sounded  like 
William's. But  it wasn't. For  just  at  that moment  the  light  came over  the hill,  and 
there  was  a  mighty  twitter  in  the  branches.  William  never  spoke  for  he  stood 
turned  to  stone  as  he  stooped;  and  Bert  and  Tom  were  stuck  like  rocks  as  they 
looked at him. And there they stand to this day,  all alone, unless the birds perch on 
them; for trolls, as you probably know, must be underground before dawn, or they 
go  back  to  the  stuff  of  the  mountains  they  are  made  of,  and  never  move  again. 
That is what had happened to Bert and Tom and William. 
"Excellent!"  said Gandalf, as he  stepped  from behind a  tree, and helped Bilbo 
to  climb  down  out  of  a  thorn-bush.  Then  Bilbo  understood.  It  was  the  wizard's 
voice  that  had  kept  the  trolls  bickering  and  quarrelling,  until  the  light  came  and 
made an end of them. 
The  next  thing  was  to  untie  the  sacks  and  let  out  the  dwarves.  They  were 
nearly  suffocated,  and  very  annoyed:  they  had  not  at  all  enjoyed  lying  there 
listening  to  the  trolls  making  plans  for  roasting  them  and  squashing  them  and 
mincing  them.  They  had  to  hear  Bilbo's  account  of  what  had  happened  to  him 
twice over, before they were satisfied.  
"Silly time to go practising pinching and pocket-picking," said Bombur, "when 
what we wanted was fire and food!" 
"And  that's  just  what  you  wouldn't  have  got  of  those  fellows  without  a 
struggle, in any case," said Gandalf. 
"Anyhow you are wasting time now. Don't you realize that the trolls must have 
a cave or a hole dug  somewhere near  to hide  from  the  sun  in? We must  look  into 
it!" 
They  searched  about,  and  soon  found  the  marks  of  trolls'  stony  boots  going 
away  through  the  trees.  They  followed  the  tracks  up  the  hill,  until  hidden  by 
bushes  they  came  on  a  big  door  of  stone  leading  to  a  cave.  But  they  could  not 
open it, not though they all pushed while Gandalf tried various incantations. 
"Would  this  be  any  good?"  asked  Bilbo,  when  they  were  getting  tired  and 
angry.  "I  found  it  on  the  ground  where  the  trolls  had  their  fight."  He  held  out  a 
largish key, though no doubt William had thought it very small and secret. It must 
have fallen out of his pocket, very luckily, before he was turned to stone. 
"Why on earth didn't you mention it before?" they cried. 
Gandalf  grabbed  it  and  fitted  it  into  the  key-hole. Then  the  stone door  swung 
back  with  one  big  push,  and  they  all  went  inside.  There were  bones  on  the  floor 

####-and  a  nasty  smell  was  in  the  air;  but  there  was  a  good  deal  of  food  jumbled 
carelessly  on  shelves  and  on  the  ground,  among  an  untidy  litter  of  plunder,  of  all 
sorts from brass buttons to pots full of gold coins standing in a corner. There were 
lots  of  clothes,  too,  hanging  on  the  walls-too  small  for  trolls,  I  am  afraid  they 
belonged  to  victims-and  among  them  were  several  swords  of  various  makes, 
shapes,  and  sizes.  Two  caught  their  eyes  particularly,  because  of  their  beautiful 
scabbards  and  jewelled  hilts.  Gandalf  and  Thorin  each  took  one  of  these;  and 
Bilbo took a knife in a leather sheath. It would have made only a tiny pocket-knife 
for a troll, but it was as good as a short sword for the hobbit. 
"These look like good blades," said the wizard, half drawing them and looking 
at them curiously. "They were not made by any troll, nor by any smith among men 
in  these  parts  and  days;  but when we  can  read  the  runes  on  them, we  shall  know 
more about them." 
"Let's  get  out  of  this  horrible  smell!"  said  Fili  So  they  carried  out  the  pots  of 
coins, and such food as was un-touched and looked fit to eat, also one barrel of ale 
which  was  still  full.  By  that  time  they  felt  like  breakfast,  and  being  very  hungry 
they  did  not  turn  their  noses  up  at what  they had got  from  the  trolls'  larder. Their 
own  provisions were  very  scanty. Now  they  had  bread  and  cheese,  and  plenty  of 
ale,  and  bacon  to  toast  in  the  embers  of  the  fire.  After  that  they  slept,  for  their 
night had been disturbed; (and they did nothing more till the afternoon. Then they 
I brought up their ponies, and carried away the pots of gold, and buried them very 
secretly not far from the track by the river, putting a great many spells over them, 
just  in  case  they  ever  had  the-chance  to  come  back  and  recover  them. When  that 
was  done,  they  all  mounted  once  more,  and  jogged  along  again  on  the  path 
towards the East. 
"Where  did  you  go  to,  if  I  may  ask?"  said  Thorin  to  Gandalf  as  they  rode 
along. 
"To look ahead," said he. 
"And what brought you back in the nick of time?" 
"Looking behind," said he. 
"Exactly!" said Thorin; "but could you be more plain?" 
"I  went  on  to  spy  out  our  road.  It  will  soon  become  dangerous  and  difficult. 
Also  I  was  anxious  about  replenishing  our  small  stock  of  provisions.  I  had  not 
gone very far, however, when I met a couple of friends of mine from Rivendell." 
"Where's that?" asked Bilbo, 
"Don't interrupt!" said Gandalf. "You will get there in a few days now, if we're 
lucky, and find out all about it As I was saying I met two of Elrond's people. They 

####-were  hurrying  along  for  fear  of  the  trolls.  It  was  they  who  told  me  that  three  of 
them had come down from the mountains and settled in the woods not far from the 
road;  they  had  frightened  everyone  away  from  the  district,  and  they  waylaid 
strangers. 
"I  immediately had  a  feeling  that  I was wanted back. Looking behind  I  saw  a 
fire  in  the  distance  and  made  for  it.  So  now  you  know.  Please  be  more  careful, 
next time, or we shall never get anywhere!" 
"Thank you!" said Thorin. 

####-<h4>Chapter 3 </h4> <br>
<br>
A Short Rest 
<br>
 
They  did  not  sing  or  tell  stories  that  day,  even  though  the weather  improved; 
nor the next day, nor the day after. They had begun to feel that danger was not far 
away on either side. They camped under the stars, and their horses had more to eat 
than  they had; for there was plenty of grass, but there was not much in their bags, 
even with what  they had got  from  the  trolls. One morning  they  forded a  river at a 
wide  shallow  place  full  of  the  noise  of  stones  and  foam.  The  far  bank  was  steep 
and slippery. When they got to the top of it, leading their ponies, they saw that the 
great mountains had marched down very near to them. Already they I seemed only 
a day's easy journey from the feet of the nearest. Dark and drear it looked, though 
there were patches of sunlight on its brown sides, and behind its shoulders the tips 
of snow-peaks gleamed. 
"Is  that  The  Mountain?"  asked  Bilbo  in  a  solemn  voice,  looking  at  it  with 
round eyes. He had never seen a thing that looked so big before. 
"Of  course  not!"  said  Balin.  "That  is  only  the  beginning  of  the  Misty 
Mountains,  and we  have  to  get  through,  or  over,  or  under  those  somehow,  before 
we  can  come  into  Wilderland  beyond.  And  it  is  a  deal  of  a  way  even  from  the 
other  side  of  them  to  the  Lonely Mountain  in  the  East Where  Smaug  lies on our 
treasure." 
"O!"  said  Bilbo,  and  just  at  that  moment  he  felt  more  fared  than  he  ever 
remembered  feeling  before. He was  thinking  once  again  of  his  comfortable  chair 
before  the  fire  in  his  favourite  sitting-room  in  his  hobbit-hole,  and  of  the  kettle 
singing. Not for the last time! 
Now  Gandalf  led  the  way.  "We  must  not  miss  the  road,  or  we  shall  be  done 
for,"  he  said.  "We  need  food,  for  one  thing,  and  rest  in  reasonable  safety-also it is 
very necessary  to  tackle  the Misty Mountains by  the proper path, or else you will 
get  lost  in  them,  and  have  to  come  back  and  start  at  the  beginning  again  (if  you 
ever get back at all)." 
They asked him where he was making for, and he answered: "You are come to 
the very edge of the Wild, as some of you may know. Hidden somewhere ahead of 
us  is  the  fair valley of Rivendell where Elrond  lives  in  the Last Homely House.  I 
sent a message by my friends, and we are expected." 
That  sounded  nice  and  comforting,  but  they  had  not  got  there  yet,  and  it was 
not  so  easy  as  it  sounds  to  find  the  Last  Homely  House  west  of  the  Mountains. 

####-There  seemed  to  be  no  trees  and  no  valleys  and  no  hills  to  break  the  ground  in 
front  of  them,  only  one  vast  slope  going  slowly  up  and  up  to meet  the  feet  of  the 
nearest  mountain,  a  wide  land  the  colour  of  heather  and  crumbling  rock,  with 
patches and slashes of grass-green and moss-green showing where water might be. 
Morning  passed,  afternoon  came;  but  in  all  the  silent waste  there was  no  sign 
of  any  dwelling.  They  were  growing  anxious,  for  they  now  saw  that  the  house 
might be hidden almost anywhere between them and the mountains. They came on 
unexpected valleys, narrow with deep sides, that opened suddenly at their feet, and 
they  looked  down  surprised  to  see  trees  below  them  and  running  water  at  the 
bottom.  There  were  gullies  that  they  could  almost  leap  over;  but  very  deep  with 
waterfalls in them. There were dark ravines that one could neither jump nor climb 
into. There were bogs, some of them green pleasant places to look at with flowers 
growing  bright  and  tall;  but  a  pony  that  walked  there  with  a  pack  on  its  back 
would never have come out again. 
It was indeed a much wider land from the ford to the mountains than ever you 
would have guessed. Bilbo was astonished. The only path was marked with white 
stones  some  of  which  were  small,  and  others  were  half  covered  with  moss  or 
heather.  Altogether  it  was  a  very  slow  business  following  the  track,  even  guided 
by Gandalf, who seemed to know his way about pretty well. 
His head and beard wagged  this way and  that as he looked for the stones, and 
they  followed  his  head,  but  they  seemed  no  nearer  to  the  end  of  the  search when 
the day began to fail. Tea-time had long gone by, and it seemed supper-time would 
soon  do  the  same.  There  were  moths  fluttering  about,  and  the  light  became  very 
dim,  for  the  moon  had  not  risen.  Bilbo's  pony  began  to  stumble  over  roots  and 
stones.  They  came  to  the  edge  of  a  steep  fall  in  the  ground  so  suddenly  that 
Gandalf s horse nearly slipped down the slope. 
"Here  it  is  at  last!"  he  called,  and  the  others  gathered  round  him  and  looked 
over the edge. They saw a valley far below. They could hear the voice of hurrying 
water in rocky bed at the bottom; the scent of trees was in the air; and there was a 
light  on  the  valley-side across the water. Bilbo never forgot the way they slithered 
and  slipped  in  the  dusk  down  the  steep  zig-zag  path  into  the  secret  valley  of 
Rivendell. The air grew warmer as  they got  lower, and  the  smell of  the pine-trees 
made  him  drowsy,  so  that  every  now  and  again  he  nodded  and  nearly  fell off, or 
bumped  his  nose  on  the  pony's  neck.  Their  spirits  rose  as  they  went  down  and 
down. The  trees changed  to beech and oak, and hire was a comfortable  feeling  in 
the  twilight. The  last green had  almost  faded out of  the grass, when  they  came  at 
length to an open glade not far above the banks of the stream. 

####-"Hrnmm!  it  smells  like  elves!"  thought  Bilbo,  and  he  looked  up  at  the  stars. 
They  were  burning  bright  and  blue.  Just  then  there  came  a  burst  of  song  like 
laughter in the trees: 
 

O! What are you doing, 
And where are you going? 
Your ponies need shoeing! 
The river is flowing! 
O! tra-la-la-lally 
here down in the valley! 
 
O! What are you seeking, 
And where are you making? 
The faggots are reeking, 
The bannocks are baking! 
O! tril-lil-lil-lolly 
the valley is jolly,  
ha! ha! 
 
O! Where are you going 
With beards all a-wagging? 
No knowing, no knowing 
What brings Mister Baggins, 
And Balin and Dwalin  
down into the valley 
in June 
ha! ha! 
 
O! Will you be staying, 
Or will you be flying? 
Your ponies are straying! 
The daylight is dying! 
To fly would be folly,  
To stay would be jolly 
And listen and hark 
Till the end of the dark 
to our tune 
ha! ha.'  

 

####-So  they  laughed  and  sang  in  the  trees;  and  pretty  fair  nonsense  I  daresay  you 
think  it. Not  that  they would  care  they would only  laugh  all  the more  if you  told 
them  so.  They  were  elves  of  course.  Soon  Bilbo  caught  glimpses  of  them  as  the 
darkness deepened. He loved elves, though he seldom met them; but he was a little 
frightened of  them  too. Dwarves don't get on well with  them. Even decent enough 
dwarves  like  Thorin  and  his  friends  think  them  foolish  (which  is  a  very  foolish 
thing to think), or get annoyed with them. For some elves tease them and laugh at 
them, and most of all at their beards. 
"Well,  well!"  said  a  voice.  "Just  look!  Bilbo  the  hobbit  on  a  pony,  my  dear! 
Isn't it delicious!" 
"Most astonishing wonderful!" 
Then  off  they  went  into  another  song  as  ridiculous  as  the  one  I  have  written 
down  in  full. At  last one, a  tall young  fellow, came out  from  the  trees and bowed 
to Gandalf and to Thorin. 
"Welcome to the valley!" he said. 
"Thank you!"  said Thorin a bit gruffly; but Gandalf was already off his horse 
and among the elves, talking merrily with them. 
"You  are  a  little  out  of  your way,"  said  the  elf:  "that  is,  if  you  are making for 
the only path across the water and to the house beyond. We will set you right, but 
you had best get on foot, until you are over the bridge. Are you going to stay a bit 
and  sing  with  us,  or  will  you  go  straight  on?  Supper  is  preparing  over  there," he 
said. "I can smell the Wood-fires for the cooking." 
Tired as he was, Bilbo would have liked to stay awhile. Elvish singing is not a 
thing  to  miss,  in  June  under  the  stars,  not  if  you  care  for  such  things.  Also  he 
would  have  liked  to  have  a  few  private  words  with  these  people  that  seemed  to 
know  his  name  and  all  about  him,  although  he  had  never  been  them  before.  He 
thought  their  opinion  of  his  adventure might  be  interesting. Elves  know  a  lot  and 
are wondrous  folk  for news, and know what  is going on among the peoples of the 
land,  as  quick  as water  flows,  or  quicker. But  the  dwarves were  all  for  supper  as 
soon  'as  possible  just  then,  and  would  not  stay.  On  they  all  went,  leading  their 
ponies, till they were brought to a good path and so at last to the very brink of the 
river.  It  was  flowing  fast  and  noisily,  as  mountain-streams  do  of  a  summer 
evening, when  sun  has  been  all  day  on  the  snow  far  up  above.  There was  only  a 
narrow bridge of stone without a parapet, as narrow as a pony could well walk on; 
and  over  that  they had  to go, slow and careful, one by one, each  leading his pony 
by  the  bridle. The  elves  had  brought  bright  lanterns  to  the  shore,  and  they  sang  a 
merry song as the party went across. 

####-"Don't dip your beard in the foam, father!" they cried to Thorin, who was bent 
almost on to his hands and knees. "It is long enough without watering it." 
"Mind  Bilbo  doesn't  eat  all  the  cakes!"  they  called.  "He  is  too  fat  to  get 
through key-holes yet!" 
"Hush,  hush!  Good  People!  and  good  night!"  said  Gandalf,  who  came  last. 
"Valleys have ears, and some elves have over merry tongues. Good night!" 
And  so  at  last  they  all  came  to  the  Last  Homely  House,  and  found  its  doors 
flung wide. 
Now  it  is  a  strange  thing,  but  things  that  are  good  to  have  and  days  that  are 
good  to spend are soon told about, and not much to listen to; while things that are 
uncomfortable, palpitating, and even gruesome, may make a good tale, and take a 
deal of telling anyway. They stayed long in that good house, fourteen days at least, 
and  they  found  it  hard  to  leave.  Bilbo  would  gladly  have  stopped  there  for  ever 
and  ever-even  supposing  a  wish  would  have  taken  him  right  back  to  his  hobbit-
hole without trouble. Yet there is little to tell about their stay.  
The  master  of  the  house  was  an  elf-friend-one  of  those  people whose  fathers 
came  into  the  strange  stories  before  the  beginning  of History,  the wars  of  the  evil 
goblins and the elves and the first men in the North. In those days of our tale there 
were  still  some  people who  had  both  elves  and  heroes  of  the North  for ancestors, 
and Elrond the master of the house was their chief. He was as noble and as fair in 
face  as  an  elf-lord,  as  strong  as  a warrior,  as wise  as  a wizard,  as  venerable  as  a 
king  of  dwarves,  and  as  kind  as  summer. He  comes  into. many  tales, but his part 
in  the  story  of  Bilbo's  great  adventure  is  only  a  small  one,  though  important,  as 
you  will  see,  if  we  ever  get  to  the  end  of  it.  His  house  was  perfect,  whether  you 
liked  food,  or  sleep,  or  work,  or  story-telling,  or  singing,  or  just  sitting  and 
thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all. Evil things did not come into that 
valley.  
I wish I had  time  to  tell you even a few of  the  tales or one or  two of  the songs 
that  they  heard  in  that  house. All  of  them,  the  ponies  as well,  grew  refreshed and 
strong  in  a  few  days  there.  Their  clothes  were  mended  as  well  as  their  bruises, 
their tempers and their hopes. Their bags were filled with food and provisions light 
to  carry  but  strong  to  bring  them  over  the  mountain  passes.  Their  plans  were 
improved  with  the  best  advice.  So  the  time  came  to  mid-  summer  eve,  and  they 
were to go on again with the early sun on midsummer morning. 
Elrond  knew  all  about  runes  of  every  kind. That  day  he  looked  at  the  swords 
they had brought from the trolls' lair, and he said: "These are not troll-make. They 
are old swords, very old swords of the High Elves of the West, my kin. They were 

####-made  in  Gondolin  for  the  Goblin-wars.  They  must  have  come  from  a  dragon's 
hoard  or  goblin  plunder,  for  dragons  and  goblins  destroyed  that  city  many  ages 
ago.  This,  Thorin,  the  runes  name  Orcrist,  the  Goblin-cleaver  in  the  ancient 
tongue  of  Gondolin;  it  was  a  famous  blade.  This,  Gandalf,  was  Glamdring,  Foe-
hammer that the king of Gondolin once wore. Keep them well!" 
"Whence  did  the  trolls  get  them,  I wonder?"  said Thorin  looking at his  sword 
with new interest. 
"I  could  not  say,"  said  Elrond,  "but  one  may  guess  that  your  trolls  had 
plundered other plunderers, or come on the remnants of old robberies in some hold 
in  the mountains  of  the North.  I  have heard  that  there are  still  forgotten  treasures 
of  old  to  be  found  in  the  deserted  caverns  of  the mines  of Moria,  since  the  dwarf 
and goblin war." 
Thorin  pondered  these  words.  "I  will  keep  this  sword  in  honour,"  he  said. 
"May it soon cleave goblins once again!" 
"A  wish  that  is  likely  to  be  granted  soon  enough  in  the  mountains!"  said 
Elrond.  "But  show  me  now  your  map!"  He  took  it  and  gazed  long  at  it,  and  he 
shook  his  head;  for  if  he  did  not  altogether  approve  of  dwarves  and  their  love  of 
gold, he hated dragons and their cruel wickedness, and he grieved to remember the 
ruin  of  the  town  of  Dale  and  its  merry  bells,  and  the  burned  banks  of  the  bright 
River Running. The moon was  shining  in  a  broad  silver  crescent. He  held  up  the 
map  and  the  white  light  shone  through  it.  "What  is  this?"  he  said.  "There  are 
moon-letters  here,  beside  the  plain  runes  which  say  'five  feet  high  the  door  and 
three may walk abreast.' " 
"What  are moon-letters?" asked  the hobbit  full of excitement. He  loved maps, 
as  I  have  told  you  before;  and  he  also  liked  runes  and  letters  and  cunning 
handwriting, though when he wrote himself it was a bit thin and spidery.  
"Moon-letters  are  rune-letters,  but  you  cannot  see  them,"  said  Elrond,  "not 
when  you  look  straight  at  them.  They  can  only  be  seen  when  the  moon  shines 
behind  them,  and what  is more, with  the more  cunning  sort  it must  be  a moon  of 
the  same  shape  and  season  as  the  day  when  they  were  written.  The  dwarves 
invented  them  and  wrote  them  with  silver  pens,  as  your  friends  could  tell  you. 
These  must  have  been  written  on  a midsummer's  eve  in  a  crescent moon,  a  long 
while ago." 
"What  do  they  say?"  asked Gandalf  and Thorin  together,  a  bit  vexed  perhaps 
that even Elrond should have found this out first, though really there had not been 
a  chance  before,  and  there  would  not  have  been  another  until  goodness  knows 
when. 

####-"Stand  by  the  grey  stone  when  the  thrush  knocks,"  read  Elrond,  "and  the 
setting sun with the last light of Durin's Day will shine upon the key-hole." 
"Durin,  Durin!"  said  Thorin.  "He  was  the  father  of  the  fathers  of  the  eldest 
race of Dwarves, the Longbeards, and my first ancestor: I am his heir." 
"Then what is Durin's Day?" asked Elrond. 
"The  first day of  the dwarves' New Year," said Thorin, "is as all should know 
the first, day of the last moon of Autumn on the threshold of Winter. We still call it 
Durin's  Day  when  the  last  moon  of  Autumn  and  the  sun  are  in  the  sky  together. 
But this will not help us much, I fear, for it passes our skill in these days to guess 
when such a time will come again." 
"That remains to be seen," said Gandalf. "Is there any more writing?" 
"None  to  be  seen  by  this  moon,"  said  Elrond,  and  he  gave  the  map  back  to 
Thorin; and then they went down to the water to see the elves dance and sing upon 
the midsummer's eve. 
The  next  morning  was  a  midsummer's  morning  as  fair  and  fresh  as  could  be 
dreamed: blue sky and never a cloud, and the sun dancing on the water. Now they 
rode away amid songs of farewell and good speed, with their hearts ready for more 
adventure,  and  with  a  knowledge  of  the  road  they  must  follow  over  the  Misty 
Mountains to the land beyond. 

####-<h4>Chapter 4 </h4> <br>

Over Hill and Under Hill 

 
There  were  many  paths  that  led  up  into  those  mountains,  and  many  passes 
over them. But most of the paths were cheats and deceptions and led nowhere or to 
bad ends; and most of the passes were infested by evil things and dreadful dangers. 
The  dwarves  and  the  hobbit,  helped  by  the  wise  advice  of  Elrond  and  the 
knowledge and memory of Gandalf, took the right road to the right pass. 
Long  days  after  they  had  climbed  out  of  the  valley  and  left  the  Last  Homely 
House  miles  behind,  they  were  still  going  up  and  up  and  up.  It  was  a  hard  path 
and  a  dangerous  path,  a  crooked  way  and  a  lonely  and  a  long.  Now  they  could 
look  back  over  the  lands  they  had  left,  laid  out  behind  them  far  below.  Far,  far 
away in the West, where things were blue and faint, Bilbo knew there lay his own 
country  of  safe  and  comfortable  things,  and  his  little  hobbit-hole. He shivered.  It 
was  getting  bitter  cold  up  here,  and  the  wind  came  shrill  among  the  rocks. 
Boulders,  too,  at  times  came  galloping  down  the  mountain-sides,  let  loose  by 
midday  sun  upon  the  snow,  and  passed  among  them  (which  was  lucky),  or  over 
their heads (which was alarming). The nights were comfortless and chill, and they 
did not dare  to sing or  talk  too  loud,  for  the echoes were uncanny, and  the silence 
seemed  to  dislike  being  broken-except by  the noise of water and  the wail of wind 
and the crack of stone. 
"The  summer  is  getting  on  down  below,"  thought  Bilbo,  "and  haymaking  is 
going  on  and  picnics. They will  be  harvesting  and  blackberrying,  before we  even 
begin to go down the other side at this rate." And the others were thinking equally 
gloomy  thoughts,  although  when  they  had  said  good-bye  to  Elrond  in  the  high 
hope  of  a  midsummer  morning,  they'  had  spoken  gaily  of  the  passage  of  the 
mountains,  and  of  riding  swift  across  the  lands  beyond.  They  had  thought  of 
coming  to  the  secret  door  in  the  Lonely  Mountain,  perhaps  that  very  next  first 
moon  of  Autumn—"  and  perhaps  it  will  be  Durin's  Day"  they  had  said.  Only 
Gandalf had  shaken his head  and  said nothing. Dwarves had not passed  that way 
for  many  years,  but  Gandalf  had,  and  he  knew  how  evil  and  danger  had  grown 
and  thriven  in  the Wild, since  the dragons had driven men from the lands, and the 
goblins had spread  in secret after  the battle of  the Mines of Moria. Even  the good 
plans  of  wise  wizards  like  Gandalf  and  of  good  friends  like  Elrond  go  astray 
sometimes when  you  are  off  on  dangerous  adventures  over  the Edge  of  the Wild; 
and Gandalf was a wise enough wizard to know it. 

####-He  knew  that  something  unexpected  might  happen,  and  he  hardly  dared  to 
hope  that  they  would  pass  without  fearful  adventure  over  those  great  tall 
mountains  with  lonely  peaks  and  valleys  where  no  king  ruled. They did not. All 
was  well,  until  one  day  they  met  a  thunderstorm  -  more  than  a  thunderstorm,  a 
thunder-battle.  You  know  how  terrific  a  really  big  thunderstorm  can  be  down  in 
the  land  and  in  a  river-valley;  especially  at  times  when  two  great  thunderstorms 
meet  and  clash. More  terrible  still  are  thunder  and  lightning  in  the  mountains  at 
night,  when  storms  come  up  from  East  and  West  and  make  war.  The  lightning 
splinters  on  the  peaks,  and  rocks  shiver,  and  great  crashes  split  the  air  and  go 
rolling  and  tumbling  into  every  cave  and  hollow;  and  the  darkness  is  filled  with 
overwhelming noise and sudden light. 
Bilbo had never seen or imagined anything of the kind. They were high up in a 
narrow place, with a dreadful fall into a dim valley at one side of them. There they 
were  sheltering  under  a  hanging  rock  for  the  night,  and  he  lay  beneath  a  blanket 
and  shook  from  head  to  toe. When  he  peeped  out  in  the  lightning-flashes, he saw 
that  across  the  valley  the  stone-giants  were  out  and  were  hurling  rocks  at  one 
another  for a. game, and catching  them, and  tossing  them down  into  the darkness 
where  they  smashed among  the  trees  far below, or  splintered  into  little bits with a 
bang.  Then  came  a  wind  and  a  rain,  and  the  wind  whipped  the  rain  and  the  hail 
about  in  every  direction,  so  that  an  overhanging  rock  was  no  protection  at  all. 
Soon  they were  getting  drenched  and  their  ponies were  standing with  their  heads 
down  and  their  tails  between  their  legs,  and  some  of  them  were  whinnying  with 
fright.  They  could  hear  the  giants  guffawing  and  shouting  all  over  the 
mountainsides. 
"This won't  do  at  all!"  said Thorin.  "If we  don't  get  blown  off  or  drowned,  or 
struck by lightning, we shall be picked up by some giant and kicked sky-high for a 
football." 
"Well,  if  you  know  of  anywhere  better, take us there!" said Gandalf, who was 
feeling very grumpy, and was far from happy about the giants himself. 
The  end of  their  argument was  that  they  sent Fill  and Kili  to  look  for  a better 
shelter. They had very sharp eyes, and being the youngest of the dwarves by some 
fifty  years  they  usually  got  these  sort  of  jobs  (when  everybody  could  see  that  it 
was  absolutely  no  use  sending Bilbo). There  is  nothing  like  looking,  if  you want 
to find something (or so Thorin said to the young dwarves). You certainly usually 
find  something,  if  you  look,  but  it  is  not  always  quite  the  something  you  were 
after. So it proved on this occasion. 

####-Soon  Fili  and  Kili  came  crawling  back,  holding  on  to  the  rocks  in  the  wind. 
"We have  found a dry cave,"  they said, "not  far  round  the next corner; and ponies 
and all could get inside." 
"Have  you  thoroughly  explored  it?"  said  the wizard, who  knew  that  caves  up 
in the mountains were seldom unoccupied. 
"Yes,  yes!"  they  said,  though  everybody  knew  they  could  not  have  been  long 
about  it;  they had come back too quick. "It isn't all that big, and it does not go far 
back." 
That,  of  course,  is  the  dangerous  part  about  caves:  you  don't  know  how  far 
they  go  back,  sometimes,  or  where  a  passage  behind  may  lead  to,  or  what  is 
waiting for you inside. But now Fili and Kill's news seemed good enough. So they 
all  got  up  and  prepared  to  move.  The  wind  was  howling  and  the  thunder  still 
growling, and  they had a business getting  themselves and  their ponies along. Still 
it was not very far to go, and before long they came to a big rock standing out into 
the path. If you stepped behind, you found a low arch in the side of the mountain. 
There was just room to get the ponies through with a squeeze, when they had been 
unpacked  and  unsaddled.  As  they  passed  under  the  arch,  it was  good  to  hear  the 
wind and the rain outside instead of all about them, and to feel safe from the giants 
and their rocks. But the wizard was taking no risks. He lit up his wand  - as he did 
that  day  in Bilbo's  dining-room  that  seemed  so  long ago,  if you remember—, and 
by its light they explored the cave from end to end. 
It seemed quite a fair size, but not  too  large and mysterious. It had a dry floor 
and some comfortable nooks. At one end there was room for the ponies; and there 
they stood (mighty glad of the change) steaming, and champing in their nosebags. 
Oin  and Gloin wanted  to  light  a  fire  at  the  door  to  dry  their  clothes,  but Gandalf 
would not hear of  it. So  they  spread out  their wet  things on  the  floor, and got dry 
ones out of  their bundles;  then they made their blankets comfortable, got out their 
pipes  and  blew  smoke  rings,  which  Gandalf  turned  into  different  colours  and  set 
dancing  up  by  the  roof  to  amuse  them.  They  talked  and  talked,  and  forgot  about 
the  storm, and discussed what each would  do with his share of the treasure (when 
they got it, which at the moment did not seem so impossible); and so they dropped 
off  to  sleep  one  by  one.  And  that  was  the  last  time  that  they  used  the  ponies, 
packages, baggages, tools and paraphernalia that they had brought with them. 
It  turned  out  a  good  thing  that  night  that  they  had  brought  little  Bilbo  with 
them, after all. For somehow, he could not go  to sleep for a  long while; and when 
he did sleep, he had very nasty dreams. He dreamed that a crack in the wall at the 
back  of  the  cave  got  bigger  and  bigger,  and  opened wider  and wider,  and  he was 

####-very  afraid  but  could  not  call  out  or  do  anything  but  lie  and  look.  Then  he 
dreamed  that  the floor of  the cave was giving way, and he was slipping-beginning 
to fall down, down, goodness knows where to. 
At  that he woke up with a horrible start, and found  that part of his dream was 
true. A crack had opened at the back of the cave, and was already a wide passage. 
He  was  just  in  time  to  see  the  last  of  the  ponies'  tails  disappearing  into  it.  Of 
course  he  gave  a  very  loud  yell,  as  loud  a  yell  as  a  hobbit  can  give,  which  is 
surprising for their size. 
Out  jumped  the  goblins,  big  goblins,  great  ugly-looking  goblins,  lots  of 
goblins,  before  you  could  say  rocks  and  blocks.  There were  six  to each dwarf, at 
least,  and  two  even  for Bilbo;  and  they were  all  grabbed  and  carried  through  the 
crack,  before  you  could  say  tinder  and  flint.  But  not  Gandalf.  Bilbo's  yell  had 
done  that  much  good.  It  had  wakened  him  up  wide  in  a  splintered  second,  and 
when  goblins  came  to  grab  him,  there  was  a  terrible  flash  like  lightning  in  the 
cave, a smell like gunpowder, and several of them fell dead. 
The  crack  closed with  a  snap,  and  Bilbo  and  the  dwarves were  on  the wrong 
side  of  it! Where was Gandalf? Of  that neither they nor the goblins had any idea, 
and  the  goblins  did  not  wait  to  find  out.  It  was  deep,  deep,  dark,  such  as  only 
goblins  that  have  taken  to  living  in  the  heart  of  the  mountains  can  see  through. 
The  passages  there  were  crossed  and  tangled  in  all  directions,  but  the  goblins 
knew  their  way,  as  well  as  you  do  to  the  nearest  post-office;  and  the  way  went 
down and down, and it was most horribly stuffy. The goblins were very rough, and 
pinched  unmercifully,  and  chuckled  and  laughed  in  their  horrible  stony  voices; 
and Bilbo was more  unhappy  even  than when  the  troll  had  picked  him  up  by  his 
toes.  He  wished  again  and  again  for  his  nice  bright  hobbit-hole. Not  for  the  last 
time. 
Now  there  came  a  glimmer  of  a  red  light  before  them.  The  goblins  began  to 
sing,  or  croak,  keeping  time  with  the  flap  of  their  flat  feet  on  the  stone,  and 
shaking their prisoners as well. 
 

Clap! Snap! the black crack! 
Grip, grab! Pinch, nab! 
And down down to Goblin -town  
You go, my lad! 
 
Clash, crash! Crush, smash! 
Hammer and tongs! Knocker and gongs! 
Pound, pound, far underground! 

####-Ho, ho! my lad! 
 
Swish, smack! Whip crack! 
Batter and beat! Yammer and bleat! 
Work, work! Nor dare to shirk, 
While Goblins quaff, and Goblins laugh, 
Round and round far underground 
Below, my lad! 

 
It  sounded  truly  terrifying. The walls  echoed  to  the  clap,  snap!  and  the  crush, 
smash!  and  to  the  ugly  laughter  of  their  ho,  ho! my  lad! The  general meaning  of 
the song was only too plain; for now the goblins took out whips and whipped them 
with  a  swish,  smack!,  and set them running as fast as they could in front of them; 
and  more  than  one  of  the  dwarves  were  already  yammering  and  bleating  like 
anything, when they stumbled into a big cavern. 
It was  lit by a great red fire  in  the middle, and by  torches along  the walls, and 
it  was  full  of  goblins.  They  all  laughed  and  stamped  and  clapped  their  hands, 
when  the  dwarves  (with  poor  little  Bilbo  at  the  back  and  nearest  to  the  whips) 
came  running  in,  while  the  goblin-drivers  whooped  and  cracked  their  whips 
behind. The  ponies were already  there huddled  in a corner; and  there were all  the 
baggages  and  packages  lying  broken  open,  and  being  rummaged  by  goblins,  and 
smelt by goblins, and fingered by goblins, and quarreled over by goblins. 
I  am  afraid  that  was  the  last  they  ever  saw  of  those  excellent  little  ponies, 
including  a  jolly  sturdy  little  white  fellow  that  Elrond  had  lent  to  Gandalf,  since 
his  horse  was  not  suitable  for  the  mountain-paths.  For  goblins  eat  horses  and 
ponies  and  donkeys  (and  other much more  dreadful  things),  and  they are always 
hungry.  Just  now  however  the  prisoners  were  thinking  only  of  themselves.  The 
goblins  chained  their  hands  behind  their  backs  and  linked  them  all  together  in  a 
line  and dragged  them  to  the  far  end of  the  cavern with  little Bilbo  tugging  at the 
end of the row.  
There in the shadows on a large flat stone sat a tremendous goblin with a huge 
head,  and  armed  goblins were  standing  round  him  carrying  the  axes  and  the  bent 
swords that they use. Now goblins are cruel, wicked, and bad-hearted. They make 
no beautiful things, but they make many clever ones. They can tunnel and mine as 
well as any but the most skilled dwarves, when they take the trouble, though they 
are  usually  untidy  and  dirty.  Hammers,  axes,  swords,  daggers,  pickaxes,  tongs, 
and  also  instruments of  torture,  they make very well, or get other people  to make 
to  their design, prisoners and  slaves  that have  to work  till  they die  for want of air 

####-and light. It is not unlikely that they invented some of the machines that have since 
troubled  the  world,  especially  the  ingenious  devices  for  killing  large  numbers  of 
people at once, for wheels and engines and explosions always delighted them, and 
also  not  working  with  their  own  hands  more  than  they  could  help;  but  in  those 
days  and  those  wild  parts  they had not  advanced  (as  it  is  called)  so  far. They did 
not  hate  dwarves  especially,  no  more  than  they  hated  everybody  and  everything, 
and  particularly  the  orderly  and  prosperous;  in  some  parts  wicked  dwarves  had 
even  made  alliances  with  them.  But  they  had  a  special  grudge  against  Thorin's 
people,  because  of  the war which  you  have  heard mentioned,  but which  does  not 
come  into  this  tale; and anyway goblins don't care who  they catch, as  long as  it  is 
done smart and secret, and the prisoners are not able to defend themselves. 
"Who are these miserable persons?" said the Great Goblin. 
"Dwarves, and this!" said one of the drivers, pulling at Bilbo's chain so that he 
fell forward onto his knees. 
"We found them sheltering in our Front Porch." 
"What do you mean by it?" said the Great Goblin turning to Thorin. "Up to no 
good, I'll warrant! Spying on the private business of my people, I guess! Thieves, I 
shouldn't  be  surprised  to  learn!  Murderers  and  friends  of  Elves,  not  unlikely! 
Come! What have you got to say?" 
"Thorin  the  dwarf  at  your  service!"  he  replied-it was merely a polite nothing. 
"Of the things which you suspect and imagine we had no idea at all. We sheltered 
from  a  storm  in what  seemed  a  convenient  cave  and  unused;  nothing was  further 
from  our  thoughts  than  inconveniencing goblins  in any way whatever." That was 
true enough! 
"Urn!"  said  the Great Goblin.  "So you  say! Might  I  ask what you were doing 
up in the mountains at all, and where you were coming from, and where you were 
going to? In fact I should like to know all about you. Not that it willdo you much 
good,  Thorin  Oakenshield,  I  know  too  much  about  your  folk  already;  but  let's 
have the truth, or I will prepare something particularly uncomfortable for you!" 
"We were on a journey to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces, and first, 
second, and third cousins, and the other descendants of our grandfathers, who live 
on  the  East  side  of  these  truly  hospitable  mountains,"  said  Thorin,  not  quite 
knowing  what  to  say  all  at  once  in  a  moment,  when  obviously  the  exact  truth 
would not do at all. 
"He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!" said one of the drivers. "Several of our 
people  were  struck  by  lightning  in  the  cave,  when  we  invited  these  creatures  to 
come  below;  and  they  are  as  dead  as  stones. Also  he  has  not  explained  this!" He 

####-held out the sword which Thorin had worn, the sword which came from the Trolls' 
lair.  
The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of rage when he looked at it, and all 
his soldiers gnashed their teeth, clashed their shields, and stamped. They knew the 
sword at once.  It had killed hundreds of goblins  in  its  time, when  the  fair elves of 
Gondolin hunted them in the hills or did battle before their walls. They had called 
it Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it simply Biter. They hated it and 
hated worse any one that carried it. 
"Murderers'  and  elf-friends!"  the  Great  Goblin  shouted.  "Slash  them!  Beat 
them! Bite  them! Gnash  them! Take  them  away  to  dark  holes  full  of  snakes,  and 
never  let  them  see  the  light  again!" He was  in  such  a  rage  that he  jumped off his 
seat and himself rushed at Thorin with his mouth open. 
Just  at  that  moment  all  the  lights  in  the  cavern  went  out,  and  the  great  fire 
went  off  poof!  into  a  tower  of  blue  glowing  smoke,  right  up  to  the  roof,  that 
scattered piercing white sparks all among the goblins. 
The  yells  and  yammering,  croaking,  jibbering  and  jabbering;  howls,  growls 
and curses; shrieking and skriking, that followed were beyond description. Several 
hundred wild  cats  and wolves being  roasted  slowly  alive  together would not have 
compared  with  it.  The  sparks  were  burning  holes  in  the  goblins,  and  the  smoke 
that  now  fell  from  the  roof  made  the  air  too  thick  for  even  their  eyes  to  see 
through. Soon they were falling over one another and rolling in heaps on the floor, 
biting and kicking and fighting as if they had all gone mad. 
Suddenly  a  sword  flashed  in  its  own  light.  Bilbo  saw  it  go  right  through  the 
Great Goblin as he stood dumbfounded in the middle of his rage. He fell dead, and 
the goblin soldiers fled before the sword shrieking into the darkness. 
The  sword  went  back  into  its  sheath.  "Follow  me  quick!"  said  a  voice  fierce 
and  quiet;  and  before Bilbo  understood what  had  happened  he was  trotting  along 
again, as fast as he could trot, at the end of the line, down more dark passages with 
the  yells  of  the  goblin-hall  growing  fainter  behind  him.  A  pale  light  was  leading 
them on. 
"Quicker, quicker!" said the voice. "The torches will soon be relit." 
"Half  a  minute!"  said  Dori,  who  was  at  the  back  next  to  Bilbo,  and  a  decent 
fellow.  He  made  the  hobbit  scramble  on  his  shoulders  as  best  he  could  with  his 
tied  hands,  and  then  off  they  all  went  at  a  run,  with  a  clink-clink  of  chains,  and 
many a stumble, since they had no hands to steady themselves with. Not for a long 
while did  they  stop,  and by  that  time  they must have been  right down  in  the very 
mountain's heart. 

####-Then  Gandalf  lit  up  his  wand.  Of  course  it  was  Gandalf;  but  just  then  they 
were  too busy  to ask how he got  there. He  took out his  sword again, and again  it 
flashed  in  the  dark  by  itself.  It  burned  with  a  rage  that  made  it  gleam  if  goblins 
were  about; now  it was bright  as blue  flame  for delight  in  the killing of  the great 
lord of the cave. It made no trouble whatever of cutting through the goblin-chains 
and  setting  all  the  prisoners  free  as  quickly  as  possible.  This  sword's  name  was 
Glamdring  the  Foe-hammer,  if  you  remember.  The  goblins  just  called  it  Beater, 
and hated it worse than Biter if possible. Orcrist, too, had been saved; for Gandalf 
had brought it along as well, snatching it from one of the terrified guards. Gandalf 
thought of most things; and though he could not do everything, he could do a great 
deal for friends in a tight comer.  
"Are we all here?" said he, handing his sword back to Thorin with a bow. "Let 
me see: one-that's Thorin; two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven; 
where  are  Fili  and  Kili?  Here  they  are,  twelve,  thirteen-and  here's Mr.  Baggins: 
fourteen!  Well,  well!  it  might  be  worse,  and  then  again  it  might  be  a  good  deal 
better. No ponies, and no food, and no knowing quite where we are, and hordes of 
angry goblins just behind! On we go!" 
On  they  went.  Gandalf  was  quite  right:  they  began  to  hear  goblin  noises  and 
horrible cries far behind in the passages they had come through. That sent them on 
faster  than  ever,  and  as  poor Bilbo  could  not  possibly  go  half  as  fast-for dwarves 
can roll along at a tremendous pace, I can tell you, when they have to-they took it 
in turn to carry him on their backs. 
Still  goblins  go  faster  than  dwarves,  and  these  goblins  knew  the  way  better 
(they had made the paths themselves), and were madly angry; so that do what they 
could  the  dwarves  heard  the  cries  and  howls  getting  closer  and  closer.  Soon  they 
could  hear  even  the  flap  of  the  goblin  feet,  many  many  feet which  seemed  only 
just  round  the  last  corner.  The  blink  of  red  torches  could  be  seen  behind  them  in 
the tunnel they were following; and they were getting deadly tired. 
"Why,  O  why  did  I  ever  leave  my  hobbit-hole!"  said  poor  Mr.  Baggins 
bumping up and down on Bombur's back. 
"Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched little hobbit on a treasure hunt!" said 
poor Bombur, who was fat, and staggered along with the sweat dripping down his 
nose in his heat and terror.  
At  this  point  Gandalf  fell  behind,  and  Thorin  with  him.  They  turned  a  sharp 
corner. "About turn!" he shouted. "Draw your sword, Thorin!" 
There was nothing else  to be done; and  the goblins did not  like  it. They came 
scurrying  round  the corner  in  full cry, and  found Goblin-cleaver and Foe-hammer 

####-shining  cold  and  bright  right  in  their  astonished  eyes.  The  ones  in  front  dropped 
their  torches  and  gave  one  yell  before  they  were  killed.  The  ones  behind  yelled 
still  more,  and  leaped  back  knocking  over  those  that  were  running  after  them. 
"Biter  and Beater!"  they  shrieked;  and  soon  they were  all  in  confusion,  and most 
of them were hustling back the way they had come. 
It was quite a  long while before any of  them dared  to  turn  that comer. By  that 
time the dwarves had gone on again, a long, long, way on into the dark tunnels of 
the  goblins'  realm.  When  the  goblins  discovered  that,  they  put  out  their  torches 
and they slipped on soft shoes, and they chose out their very quickest runners with 
the sharpest ears and eyes. These ran forward, as swift as weasels in the dark,  and 
with hardly any more noise than bats. 
That  is  why  neither  Bilbo,  nor  the  dwarves,  nor  even  Gandalf  heard  them 
coming. Nor did they see them. But they were seen by the goblins that ran silently 
up  behind,  for  Gandalf  was  letting  his  wand  give  out  a  faint  light  to  help  the 
dwarves as they went along. 
Quite suddenly Dori, now at the back again carrying Bilbo, was grabbed from 
behind in the dark. He shouted and fell; and the hobbit rolled off his shoulders into 
the blackness, bumped his head on hard rock, and remembered nothing more. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 5 </h4> <br>

Riddles in the Dark 

 
When Bilbo opened his eyes, he wondered  if he had; for  it was  just as dark as 
with them shut. No one was anywhere near him. Just imagine his fright! He could 
hear nothing, see nothing, and he could feel nothing except the stone of the floor.  
Very slowly he got up and groped about on all fours, till he touched the wall of 
the  tunnel;  but  neither  up  nor  down  it  could  he  find  anything:  nothing  at  all,  no 
sign of goblins, no sign of dwarves. His head was swimming, and he was far from 
certain  even  of  the  direction  they  had  been  going  in  when  he  had  his  fall.  He 
guessed  as well  as  he  could,  and  crawled  along  for  a  good way,  till  suddenly  his 
hand met what felt like a tiny ring of cold metal lying on the floor of the tunnel. It 
was  a  turning  point  in  his  career,  but  he  did  not  know  it.  He  put  the  ring  in  his 
pocket  almost without  thinking;  certainly  it  did  not  seem  of  any  particular  use  at 
the moment. He did not go much  further, but sat down on  the cold  floor and gave 
himself  up  to  complete  miserableness,  for  a  long  while.  He  thought  of  himself 
frying bacon and eggs  in his own kitchen at home  - for he could feel inside that it 
was high time for some meal or other; but that only made him miserabler.  
He could not think what to do; nor could he think what had happened; or why 
he  had  been  left  behind;  or  why,  if  he  had  been  left  behind,  the  goblins  had  not 
caught  him;  or  even  why  his  head  was  so  sore.  The  truth  was  he  had  been  lying 
quiet, out of sight and out of mind, in a very dark corner for a long while. 
After some time he felt for his pipe. It was not broken, and that was something. 
Then  he  felt  for  his  pouch,  and  there  was  some  tobacco  in  it,  and  that  was 
something more. Then he felt for matches and he could not find any at all, and that 
shattered his hopes completely. Just as well for him, as he agreed when he came to 
his senses. Goodness knows what the striking of matches and the smell of tobacco 
would  have  brought  on  him  out  of  dark  holes  in  that  horrible  place.  Still  at  the 
moment he felt very crushed. But in slapping all his pockets and feeling all round 
himself  for matches his hand came on  the hilt of his  little sword  - the little dagger 
that he got from the trolls, and that he had quite forgotten; nor do the goblins seem 
to have noticed it, as he wore it inside his breeches. 
Now  he  drew  it  out.  It  shone  pale  and  dim  before  his  eyes.  "So  it  is  an  elvish 
blade, too," he thought; "and goblins are not very near, and yet not far enough." 
But  somehow  he was  comforted.  It was  rather  splendid  to be wearing  a blade 
made  in Gondolin for  the goblin-wars of which so many songs had sung; and also 

####-he  had  noticed  that  such  weapons made  a  great  impression  on  goblins  that  came 
upon them suddenly.  
"Go  back?"  he  thought.  "No  good  at  all!  Go  sideways?  Impossible!  Go 
forward? Only  thing  to  do! On we  go!"  So  up  he  got,  and  trotted  along with  his 
little sword held in front of him and one hand feeling the wall, and his heart all of 
a patter and a pitter.  
 
Now  certainly  Bilbo  was  in  what  is  called  a  tight  place.  But  you  must 
remember  it  was  not  quite  so  tight  for  him  as  it  would  have  been  for  me  or  for 
you. Hobbits are not quite like ordinary people; and after all if their holes are nice 
cheery  places  and  properly  aired,  quite  different  from  the  tunnels  of  the  goblins, 
still they are more used to tunnelling than we are, and they do not easily lose their 
sense  of  direction  underground-not  when  their  heads  have  recovered  from  being 
bumped.  Also  they  can  move  very  quietly,  and  hide  easily,  and  recover 
wonderfully  from  falls  and  bruises,  and  they  have  a  fund  of  wisdom  and  wise 
sayings that men have mostly never heard or have forgotten long ago. 
I  should  not  have  liked  to  have  been  in Mr. Baggins'  place,  all  the  same. The 
tunnel seemed to have no end. All he knew was that it was still going down pretty 
steadily  and  keeping  in  the  same  direction  in  spite  of  a  twist  and  a  turn  or  two. 
There were passages leading off to the side every now and then, as he knew by the 
glimmer of his sword, or  could feel with his hand on the wall. Of these he took no 
notice,  except  to  hurry  past  for  fear  of  goblins  or  half-imagined  dark  things 
coming out of them. On and on he went, and down and down; and still he heard no 
sound of anything except  the occasional  whirr of a bat by his ears, which  startled 
him at first, till it became too frequent to bother about. I do not know how long he 
kept  on  like  this,  hating  to  go  on,  not  daring  to  stop,  on,  on,  until  he was  tireder 
than tired. It seemed like all the way to tomorrow and over it to the days beyond. 
Suddenly  without  any  warning  he  trotted  splash  into  water!  Ugh!  it  was  icy 
cold. That  pulled  him  up  sharp  and  short. He  did  not  know whether  it was  just  a 
pool in the path, or the edge of an underground stream that crossed the passage, or 
the  brink  of  a  deep  dark  subterranean  lake.  The  sword was  hardly  shining  at  all. 
He  stopped,  and  he  could  hear,  when  he  listened  hard,  drops  drip-drip-dripping 
from an unseen roof into the water below; but there seemed no other sort of sound. 
"So  it  is  a  pool  or  a  lake,  and  not  an  underground  river,"  he  thought.  Still  he 
did  not  dare  to  wade  out  into  the  darkness.  He  could  not  swim;  and  he  thought, 
too,  of  nasty  slimy  things,  with  big  bulging  blind  eyes,  wriggling  in  the  water. 
There  are  strange  things  living  in  the  pools  and  lakes  in  the  hearts  of mountains: 

####-fish whose fathers swam in, goodness only knows how many years ago, and never 
swam out again, while their eyes grew bigger and bigger and bigger from trying to 
see  in  the  blackness;  also  there  are other  things more  slimy  than  fish. Even  in  the 
tunnels  and  caves  the  goblins  have  made  for  themselves  there  are  other  things 
living unbeknown to them that have sneaked in from outside to lie up in the dark. 
Some  of  these  caves,  too,  go  back  in  their  beginnings  to  ages  before  the  goblins, 
who  only  widened  them  and  joined  them  up  with  passages,  and  the  original 
owners are still there in odd comers, slinking and nosing about. 
Deep down here by  the dark water  lived old Gollum, a small slimy creature. I 
don't  know where  he  came  from,  nor who  or what  he was. He was Gollum  — as 
dark  as  darkness,  except  for  two  big  round  pale  eyes  in  his  thin  face.  He  had  a 
little boat, and he rowed about quite quietly on the lake; for lake it was, wide and 
deep  and  deadly  cold.  He  paddled  it  with  large  feet  dangling  over  the  side,  but 
never a ripple did he make. Not he. He was looking out of his pale lamp-like eyes 
for  blind  fish,  which  he  grabbed  with  his  long  fingers  as  quick  as  thinking.  He 
liked  meat  too.  Goblin  he  thought  good,  when  he  could  get  it;  but  he  took  care 
they  never  found  him  out.  He  just  throttled  them  from  behind,  if  they  ever  came 
down  alone  anywhere  near  the  edge  of  the  water,  while  he  was  prowling  about. 
They  very  seldom  did,  for  they  had  a  feeling  that  something  unpleasant  was 
lurking down there, down at the very roots of the mountain. They had come on the 
lake, when  they were  tunnelling down  long ago, and  they  found  they could go no 
further;  so  there  their  road  ended  in  that  direction,  and  there was no  reason  to go 
that  way-unless  the  Great  Goblin  sent  them.  Sometimes  he  took  a  fancy  for  fish 
from the lake, and sometimes neither goblin nor fish came back. 
Actually Gollum  lived on a slimy  island of  rock  in  the middle of  the  lake. He 
was  watching  Bilbo  now  from  the  distance  with  his  pale  eyes  like  telescopes. 
Bilbo could not see him, but he was wondering a lot about Bilbo, for he could see 
that he was no goblin at all. 
Gollum got  into his boat  and  shot off  from  the  island, while Bilbo was  sitting 
on  the  brink  altogether  flummoxed  and  at  the  end  of  his  way  and  his  wits. 
Suddenly up came Gollum and whispered and hissed: 
"Bless  us  and  splash  us, my  precioussss!  I  guess  it's  a  choice  feast;  at  least  a 
tasty morsel  it'd make  us,  gollum!" And when  he  said gollum he made a horrible 
swallowing  noise  in  his  throat.  That  is  how  he  got  his  name,  though  he  always 
called himself 'my precious.' 
The  hobbit  jumped  nearly  out  of  his  skin when  the  hiss  came  in  his  ears,  and 
he suddenly saw the pale eyes sticking out at him. 

####-"Who are you?" he said, thrusting his dagger in front of him. 
"What iss he, my preciouss?" whispered Gollum (who always spoke to himself 
through  never  having  anyone  else  to  speak  to). This  is what  he  had  come  to  find 
out,  for  he was  not  really  very  hungry  at  the moment, only  curious; otherwise he 
would have grabbed first and whispered afterwards. 
"I  am Mr. Bilbo Baggins.  I  have  lost  the  dwarves  and  I  have  lost  the wizard, 
and I don't know where I am; and "I don't want to know, if only I can get ,away." 
"What's  he  got  in  his  handses?"  said Gollum,  looking  at  the  sword, which  he 
did not quite like. 
"A sword, a blade which came out of Gondolin!" 
"Sssss,"  said  Gollum,  and  became  quite  polite.  "Praps  ye  sits  here  and  chats 
with  it  a  bitsy,  my  preciousss.  It  like  riddles,  praps  it  does,  does  it?"  He  was 
anxious  to  appear  friendly,  at  any  rate  for  the  moment,  and  until  he  found  out 
more  about  the  sword  and  the  hobbit, whether  he was  quite  alone  really, whether 
he  was  good  to  eat,  and  whether  Gollum  was  really  hungry.  Riddles were  all  he 
could  think  of.  Asking  them,  and  sometimes  guessing  them,  had  been  the  only 
game  he  had  ever  played  with  other  funny  creatures  sitting  in  their  holes  in  the 
long, long ago, before he lost all his friends and was driven away, alone, and crept 
down, down, into the dark under the mountains. 
"Very  well,"  said  Bilbo,  who  was  anxious  to  agree,  until  he  found  out  more 
about  the  creature, whether  he was  quite  alone, whether  he was  fierce  or  hungry, 
and whether he was a friend of the goblins. 
"You ask first," he said, because he had not had time to think of a riddle. 
So Gollum hissed: 
 

What has roots as nobody sees, 
Is taller than trees, 
Up, up it goes, 
And yet never grows?  

 
"Easy!" said Bilbo. "Mountain, I suppose." 
"Does  it  guess  easy?  It  must  have  a  competition  with  us,  my  preciouss!  If 
precious asks, and it doesn't answer, we eats it, my preciousss. If it asks us, and we 
doesn't answer, then we does what it wants, eh? We shows it the way out, yes!" 
"All  right!" said Bilbo, not daring  to disagree, and nearly bursting his brain to 
think of riddles that could save him from being eaten. 
 

Thirty white horses on a red hill, 

####-First they champ, 
Then they stamp, 
Then they stand still. 

 
That was all he could think of to ask-the idea of eating was rather on his mind. 
It was rather an old one, too, and Gollum knew the answer as well as you do. 
"Chestnuts,  chestnuts,"  he  hissed.  "Teeth!  teeth!  my  preciousss;  but  we  has 
only six!" Then he asked his second: 
 

Voiceless it cries, 
Wingless flutters, 
Toothless bites, 
Mouthless mutters. 

 
"Half  a  moment!"  cried  Bilbo,  who  was  still  thinking  uncomfortably  about 
eating.  Fortunately  he  had  once  heard  something  rather  like  this  before,  and 
getting  his  wits  back  he  thought  of  the  answer.  "Wind,  wind  of  course,"  he  said, 
and  he was  so  pleased  that  he made  up  one  on  the  spot.  "This'll  puzzle  the  nasty 
little underground creature," he thought: 
 

An eye in a blue face 
Saw an eye in a green face. 
"That eye is like to this eye"  
Said the first eye, 
"But in low place, 
Not in  high place."  

 
"Ss, ss, ss," said Gollum. He had been underground a long long time, and was 
forgetting  this  sort  of  thing.  But  just  as  Bilbo  was  beginning  to  hope  that  the 
wretch  would  not  be  able  to  answer,  Gollum  brought  up  memories  of  ages  and 
ages and ages before, when he lived with his grandmother in a hole in a bank by a 
river, "Sss, sss, my preciouss," he said. "Sun on the daisies it means, it does." 
But  these  ordinary  aboveground  everyday  sort  of  riddles  were  tiring  for  him. 
Also  they  reminded  him  of  days  when  he  had  been  less  lonely  and  sneaky  and 
nasty, and that put him out of temper. What is more they made him hungry; so this 
time he tried something a bit more difficult and more unpleasant: 
 

It cannot be seen, cannot be felt, 
Cannot be heard, cannot be smelt. 

####-It lies behind stars and under hills, 
And empty holes it fills. 
It comes first and follows after,  
Ends life, kills laughter.  

 
Unfortunately  for  Gollum  Bilbo  had  heard  that  sort  of  thing  before;  and  the 
answer  was  all  round  him  anyway.  "Dark!"  he  said  without  even  scratching  his 
head or putting on his thinking cap. 
 

A box without hinges, key, or lid, 
Yet golden treasure inside is hid, 

 
he asked  to gain  time, until he could  think of a really hard one. This he  thought a 
dreadfully  easy  chestnut,  though  he  had  not  asked  it  in  the  usual  words.  But  it 
proved a nasty poser for Gollum. He hissed to himself, and still he did not answer; 
he whispered and spluttered. 
After  some  while  Bilbo  became  impatient.  "Well,  what  is  it?"  he  said.  "The 
answer's  not  a  kettle  boiling  over,  as  you  seem  to  think  from  the  noise  you  are 
making." 
"Give us a chance; let it give us a chance, my preciouss-ss-ss." 
"Well," said Bilbo, after giving him a long chance, "what about your guess?" 
But  suddenly  Gollum  remembered  thieving  from  nests  long  ago,  and  sitting 
under  the  river bank  teaching his grandmother,  teaching his grandmother  to suck-
"Eggses!" he hissed. "Eggses it is!" Then he asked: 
 

A live without breath, 
As cold as death; 
Never thirsty, ever drinking, 
All in mail never clinking. 

 
He  also  in  his  turn  thought  this  was  a  dreadfully  easy  one,  because  he  was 
always  thinking  of  the  answer. But  he  could  not  remember  anything  better  at  the 
moment,  he was  so  flustered  by  the  egg-question. All  the  same  it was  a poser  for 
poor  Bilbo,  who  never  had  anything  to  do  with  the  water  if  he  could  help  it.  I 
imagine you know the answer, of course, or can guess it as easy as winking, since 
you  are  sitting  comfortably  at  home  and  have  not  the  danger  of  being  eaten  to 
disturb  your  thinking.  Bilbo  sat  and  cleared  his  throat  once  or  twice,  but  no 
answer came. 

####-After  a  while  Gollum  began  to  hiss  with  pleasure  to  himself:  "Is  it  nice,  my 
preciousss? Is it juicy? Is it scrumptiously crunchable?" He began to peer at Bilbo 
out of the darkness. 
"Half  a  moment,"  said  the  hobbit  shivering.  "I  gave  you  a  good  long  chance 
just now." 
"It must make  haste,  haste!"  said Gollum,  beginning  to  climb  out  of  his  boat 
on to the shore to get at Bilbo. But when he put his long webby foot in the water, a 
fish jumped out in a fright and fell on Bilbo's toes. 
"Ugh!"  he  said,  "it  is  cold  and  clammy!"-and  so  he  guessed.  "Fish!  Fish!"  he 
cried. "It is fish!" 
Gollum was  dreadfully  disappointed;  but Bilbo  asked  another  riddle  as  quick 
as ever be could, so that Gollum had to get back into his boat and think. 
 
No-legs lay on one-leg, two-legs sat near on three-legs, four-legs got some. 
 
It was not really the right time for this riddle, but Bilbo was in a hurry. Gollum 
might  have  had  some  trouble  guessing  it,  if  he  had  asked  it  at  another time. As it 
was,  talking  of  fish,  "no-legs" was not so very difficult, and after that the rest was 
easy. "Fish on a  little  table, man at  table sitting on a stool,  the cat has  the bones"-
that  of  course  is  the  answer,  and  Gollum  soon  gave  it.  Then  he  thought  the  time 
had come to ask something hard and horrible. This is what he said: 
 

This thing all things devours:  
Birds, beasts, trees, flowers;  
Gnaws iron, bites steel; 
Grinds hard stones to meal; 
Slays king, ruins town, 
And beats high mountain down. 

 
Poor  Bilbo  sat  in  the  dark  thinking  of  all  the  horrible  names  of  all  the  giants 
and ogres he had ever heard told of in tales, but not one of them had done all these 
things.  He  had  a  feeling  that  the  answer  was  quite  different  and  that  he  ought  to 
know it, but he could not think of it. He began to get frightened, and that is bad for 
thinking.  Gollum  began  to  get  out  of  his  boat.  He  flapped  into  the  water  and 
paddled  to  the  bank;  Bilbo  could  see  his  eyes  coming  towards  him.  His  tongue 
seemed  to  stick  in  his mouth; he wanted  to  shout out:  "Give me more  time! Give 
me time!" But all that came out with a sudden squeal was: 
"Time! Time!" 

####-Bilbo was saved by pure luck. For that of course was the answer.  
Gollum was  disappointed  once more;  and  now  he was  getting  angry,  and also 
tired  of  the  game.  It  had made  him  very  hungry  indeed.  This  time  he  did  not  go 
back  to  the  boat.  He  sat  down  in  the  dark  by  Bilbo.  That  made  the  hobbit  most 
dreadfully uncomfortable and scattered his wits. 
"It's  got  to  ask  uss  a  quesstion, my  preciouss, yes, yess, yesss.  Jusst one more 
quesstion to guess, yes, yess," said Gollum. 
But  Bilbo  simply  could  not  think  of  any  question  with  that  nasty  wet  cold 
thing  sitting  next  to  him,  and  pawing  and  poking  him.  He  scratched  himself,  he 
pinched himself; still he could not think of anything. 
"Ask us! ask us!" said Gollum. 
Bilbo  pinched  himself  and  slapped  himself;  he  gripped  on  his  little  sword;  he 
even felt  in his pocket with his other hand. There he found  the ring he had picked 
up in the passage and forgotten about. 
"What have I got in my pocket?" he said aloud. He was talking to himself, but 
Gollum thought it was a riddle, and he was frightfully upset. 
"Not fair! not fair!" he hissed. "It isn't fair, my precious, is it, to ask us what it's 
got in its nassty little pocketses?" 
Bilbo seeing what had happened and having nothing better  to ask stuck  to his 
question. "What have I got in my pocket?" he said louder.  
"S-s-s-s-s,"  hissed  Gollum.  "It  must  give  us  three  guesseses,  my  preciouss, 
three guesseses." 
"Very well! Guess away!" said Bilbo. 
"Handses!" said Gollum. 
"Wrong," said Bilbo, who had luckily just taken his hand 
out again. "Guess again!" 
"S-s-s-s-s,"  said Gollum more  upset  than  ever. He  thought  of  all  the  things  he 
kept  in  his  own  pockets:  fishbones,  goblins'  teeth, wet  shells,  a  bit  of  bat-wing, a 
sharp stone to sharpen his fangs on, and other nasty things. He tried to think what 
other people kept in their pockets. 
"Knife!" he said at last. 
"Wrong!" said Bilbo, who had lost his some time ago. "Last guess!" 
Now Gollum was  in  a much worse  state  than when  Bilbo  had  asked  him  the 
egg-question.  He  hissed  and  spluttered  and  rocked  himself  backwards  and 
forwards, and slapped his feet on the floor, and wriggled and squirmed; but still he 
did not dare to waste his last guess. 

####-"Come  on!"  said  Bilbo.  "I  am waiting!" He  tried  to  sound  bold  and  cheerful, 
but  he  did  not  feel  at  all  sure  how  the  game  was  going  to  end,  whether  Gollum 
guessed right or not. 
"Time's up!" he said. 
"String,  or  nothing!"  shrieked  Gollum,  which  was  not  quite  fair-working  in 
two guesses at once. 
"Both  wrong,"  cried  Bilbo  very much  relieved;  and  he  jumped  at  once  to  his 
feet,  put  his  back  to  the  nearest  wall,  and  held  out  his  little  sword.  He  knew,  of 
course,  that  the  riddle-game  was  sacred  and  of  immense  antiquity,  and  even 
wicked creatures were afraid  to cheat when  they played at  it. But he  felt he could 
not trust this slimy thing to keep any promise at a pinch. Any excuse would do for 
him to slide out of it. And after all that last question had not been a genuine riddle 
according to the ancient laws. 
But at any  rate Gollum did not at once attack him. He could  see  the  sword  in 
Bilbo's  hand.  He  sat  still,  shivering  and  whispering.  At  last  Bilbo  could  wait  no 
longer.  
"Well?" he said. "What about your  promise? I want to go. You must show me 
the way." 
"Did we say so, precious? Show the nassty little Baggins the way out, yes, yes. 
But what has  it got  in  its pocketses, eh? Not string, precious, but not nothing. Oh 
no! gollum!" 
"Never you mind," said Bilbo. "A promise is a promise." 
"Cross  it  is,  impatient,  precious,"  hissed  Gollum.  "But  it  must  wait,  yes  it 
must. We  can't  go  up  the  tunnels  so  hasty. We must  go  and  get  some  things  first, 
yes, things to help us." 
"Well,  hurry  up!"  said  Bilbo,  relieved  to  think  of  Gollum  going  away.  He 
thought he was just making an excuse and did not mean to come back. What was 
Gollum talking about? What useful thing could he keep out on the dark lake? But 
he  was  wrong.  Gollum  did  mean  to  come  back.  He  was  angry  now  and  hungry.  
And he was a miserable wicked creature, and already he had a plan. 
Not  far  away  was  his  island,  of  which  Bilbo  knew  nothing,  and  there  in  his 
hiding-place he kept a few wretched oddments, and one very beautiful thing, very 
beautiful, very wonderful. He had a ring, a golden ring, a precious ring. 
"My  birthday-present!"  he  whispered  to  himself,  as  he  had  often  done  in  the 
endless dark days. "That's what we wants now, yes; we wants it!" 

####-He  wanted  it  because  it  was  a  ring  of  power,  and  if  you  slipped  that  ring on 
your  finger,  you  were  invisible;  only  in  the  full  sunlight  could  you  be  seen,  and 
then only by your shadow, and that would be shaky and faint. 
"My  birthday-present! It came to me on my birthday, my precious," So he had 
always  said  to  himself.  But  who  knows  how Gollum  came  by  that  present,  ages 
ago  in  the old days when such rings were still at  large  in  the world? Perhaps even 
the Master who ruled them could not have said. Gollum used to wear it at first, till 
it tired him; and then he kept it in a pouch next his skin, till it galled him; and now 
usually he hid it in a hole in the rock on his island, and was always going back to 
look  at  it.  And  still  sometimes  he  put  it  on,  when  he  could  not  bear  to  be  parted 
from  it  any  longer,  or when  he was  very,  very,  hungry, and  tired of  fish. Then he 
would creep along dark passages looking for stray goblins. He might even venture 
into  places  where  the  torches  were  lit  and made  his  eyes  blink  and  smart;  for  he 
would  be  safe.  Oh  yes,  quite  safe.  No  one  would  see  him,  no  one  would  notice 
him,  till  he  had  his  fingers  on  their  throat. Only  a  few  hours  ago  he  had worn  it, 
and caught a small goblin-imp. How it squeaked! He still had a bone or two left to 
gnaw, but he wanted something softer.  
"Quite  safe,  yes,"  he  whispered  to  himself.  "It  won't  see  us,  will  it,  my 
precious? No. It won't see us, and its nassty little sword will be useless, yes quite." 
That is what was in his wicked little mind, as he slipped suddenly from Bilbo's 
side,  and  flapped  back  to  his  boat,  and  went  off  into  the  dark.  Bilbo  thought  he 
had  heard  the  last  of  him. Still  he waited  a while;  for  he  had  no  idea  how  to  find 
his way out alone. 
Suddenly  he  heard  a  screech.  It  sent  a  shiver  down  his  back.  Gollum  was 
cursing and wailing away in the gloom, not very far off by the sound of it. He was 
on his island, scrabbling here and there, searching and seeking in vain. 
"Where is it? Where iss it?" Bilbo heard him crying. "Losst it is, my precious, 
lost, lost! Curse us and crush us, my precious is lost!" 
"What's the matter?" Bilbo called. "What have you lost?" 
"It mustn't  ask  us,"  shrieked Gollum.  "Not  its  business,  no,  gollum!  It's  losst, 
gollum, gollum, gollum." 
"Well,  so  am  I,"  cried  Bilbo,  "and  I want  to  get  unlost. And  I won  the  game, 
and you promised. So come along! Come and let me out, and then go on with your 
looking!" 
Utterly  miserable  as  Gollum  sounded,  Bilbo  could  not  find  much  pity  in  his 
heart, and he had a feeling that anything Gollum wanted so much could hardly be 
something good. 

####-"Come along!" he shouted. 
"No,  not  yet,  precious!"  Gollum  answered.  "We  must  search  for  it,  it's  lost, 
gollum." 
"But you never guessed my last question, and you promised," said Bilbo. 
"Never guessed!"  said Gollum. Then  suddenly out of  the gloom came a  sharp 
hiss. "What has it got in its pocketses? Tell us that. It must tell first." 
As  far  as  Bilbo  knew,  there  was  no  particular  reason  why  he  should  not  tell. 
Gollum's mind had jumped to a guess quicker than his; naturally, for Gollum had 
brooded  for  ages  on  this  one  thing,  and  he  was  always  afraid  of  its  being  stolen. 
But Bilbo was annoyed at  the delay. After all, he had won  the game, pretty fairly, 
at a horrible risk. "Answers were to be guessed not given," he said. 
"But it wasn't a fair question," said Gollum. "Not a riddle, precious, no." 
"Oh  well,  if  it's  a  matter  of  ordinary  questions,"  Bilbo  replied,  "then  I  asked 
one first. What have you lost? Tell me that!" 
"What has it got in its pocketses?" The sound came hissing louder and sharper, 
and as he  looked  towards  it,  to his alarm  Bilbo now saw two small points of light 
peering  at  him. As  suspicion  grew  in Gollum's mind,  the  light  of  his  eyes  burned 
with a pale flame. 
"What have you lost?" Bilbo persisted. But now the light in Gollum's eyes had 
become  a  green  fire,  and  it  was  coming  swiftly  nearer.  Gollum  was  in  his  boat 
again,  paddling  wildly  back  to  the  dark  shore;  and  such  a  rage  of  loss  and 
suspicion was in his heart that no sword had any more terror for him. 
Bilbo  could  not  guess  what  had maddened  the  wretched  creature,  but  he  saw 
that all was up, and that Gollum meant to murder him at any rate. Just in time he 
turned  and  ran  blindly  back  up  the  dark  passage  down  which  he  had  come, 
keeping close to the wall and feeling it with his left hand. 
"What  has  it  got  in  its  pocketses?"  he heard  the hiss  loud behind him, and  the 
splash as Gollum leapt from his boat. 
"What have I, I wonder?" he said to himself, as he panted and stumbled along. 
He put his left hand in his pocket. The ring felt very cold as it quietly slipped on to 
his groping forefinger.  
The  hiss  was  close  behind  him.  He  turned  now  and  saw  Gollum's  eyes  like 
small  green  lamps  coming  up  the  slope.  Terrified  he  tried  to  run  faster,  but 
suddenly he struck his toes on a snag in the floor, and fell flat with his little sword 
under him. 

####-In a moment Gollum was on him. But before Bilbo could do anything, recover 
his breath, pick himself up, or wave his sword, Gollum passed by, taking no notice 
of him, cursing and whispering as he ran. 
What could it mean? Gollum could see in the dark. Bilbo could see the light of 
his  eyes  palely  shining  even  from  behind.  Painfully  he  got  up,  and  sheathed  his 
sword,  which  was  now  glowing  faintly  again,  then  very  cautiously  he  followed. 
There seemed nothing else to do. It was no good crawling back down to Gollum's 
water. Perhaps if he followed him, Gollum might lead him to some way of escape 
without meaning to. 
"Curse  it!  curse  it!  curse  it!"  hissed  Gollum.  "Curse  the  Baggins!  It's  gone! 
What has it got in its pocketses? Oh we guess, we guess, my precious. He's found 
it, yes he must have. My birthday-present." 
Bilbo  pricked  up  his  ears.  He  was  at  last  beginning  to  guess  himself.  He 
hurried  a  little,  getting  as  close  as  he  dared  behind  Gollum,  who  was  still  going 
quickly,  not  looking  back,  but  turning  his  head  from  side  to  side,  as Bilbo  could 
see from the faint glimmer on the walls. 
"My birthday-present! Curse it! How did we lose it, my precious? Yes, that's it. 
When we came  this way  last, when we  twisted  that nassty young squeaker. That's 
it. Curse it! It slipped from us, after all these ages and ages! It's gone, gollum." 
Suddenly Gollum sat down and began to weep, a whistling and gurgling sound 
horrible  to  listen  to.  Bilbo  halted  and  flattened  himself  against  the  tunnel-wall. 
After a while Gollum stopped weeping and began to talk. He seemed to be having 
an argument with himself. 
"It's  no  good  going  back  there  to  search,  no.  We  doesn't  remember  all  the 
places we've  visited. And  it's  no  use.  The  Baggins  has  got  it  in  its  pocketses;  the 
nassty noser has found it, we says." 
"We  guesses,  precious,  only  guesses.  We  can't  know  till  we  find  the  nassty 
creature and squeezes it. But it doesn't know what the present can do, does it? It'll 
just  keep  it  in  its  pocketses.  It  doesn't  know,  and  it  can't  go  far.  It's  lost  itself, the 
nassty nosey thing. It doesn't know the way out It said so." 
"It  said  so, yes; but  it's  tricksy.  It doesn't  say what  it means.  It won't  say what 
it's got in its pocketses. It knows. It knows a way in, it must know a way out, yes. 
It's off to the back-door. To the back-door, that's it." 
"The goblinses will catch it then. It can't get out that way, precious." 
"Ssss,  sss,  gollum!  Goblinses!  Yes,  but  if  it's  got  the  present,  our  precious 
present,  then  goblinses  will  get  it,  gollum!  They'll  find  it,  they'll  find  out what  it 
does. We shan't ever be safe again, never, gollum! One of  the goblinses will put  it 

####-on, and  then no one will  see him. He'll be  there but not  seen. Not even our clever 
eyeses  will  notice  him;  and  he'll  come  creepsy  and  tricksy  and  catch  us,  gollum, 
gollum!" 
"Then let's stop talking, precious, and make haste. If the Baggins has gone that 
way, we must go quick and see. Go! Not far now. Make haste!" 
With  a  spring Gollum got up  and  started  shambling off  at  a great pace. Bilbo 
hurried  after  him,  still  cautiously,  though  his  chief  fear  now  was  of  tripping  on 
another snag and falling with a noise. His head was in a whirl of hope and wonder. 
It  seemed  that  the  ring  he  had  was  a  magic  ring:  it  made  you  invisible!  He  had 
heard  of  such  things,  of  course,  in old old  tales; but  it was hard  to believe  that he 
really  had  found  one,  by  accident.  Still  there  it was: Gollum with  his  bright  eyes 
had passed him by, only a yard to one side. 
On  they  went,  Gollum  flip-flapping  ahead,  hissing  and  cursing;  Bilbo  behind 
going  as  softly  as  a  hobbit  can.  Soon  they  came  to  places  where,  as  Bilbo  had 
noticed  on  the way  down,  side-passages opened, this way and that. Gollum began 
at once to count them. 
"One  left,  yes. One  right,  yes. Two  right,  yes,  yes. Two  left,  yes,  yes." And so 
on and on. 
As  the count grew he slowed down, and he began  to get shaky and weepy; for 
he  was  leaving  the  water  further  and  further  behind,  and  he  was  getting  afraid. 
Goblins  might  be  about,  and  he  had  lost  his  ring.  At  last  he  stopped  by  a  low 
opening, on their left as they went up. 
"Seven  right,  yes.  Six  left,  yes!"  he  whispered.  "This  is  it.  This  is  the  way  to 
the back-door, yes. Here's the passage!" 
He  peered  in,  and  shrank  back.  "But  we  durstn't  go  in,  precious,  no  we 
durstn't. Goblinses down there. Lots of goblinses. We smells them. Ssss!" 
"What shall we do? Curse them and crush them! We must wait here, precious, 
wait a bit and see." 
So  they  came  to  a  dead  stop. Gollum  had  brought  Bilbo  to  the way  out  after 
all,  but  Bilbo  could  not  get  in!  There was Gollum  sitting humped up  right  in  the 
opening,  and his  eyes gleamed  cold  in his head,  as he  swayed  it  from  side  to  side 
between his knees. 
Bilbo  crept  away  from  the  wall  more  quietly  than  a  mouse;  but  Gollum 
stiffened  at  once,  and  sniffed,  and  his  eyes  went  green.  He  hissed  softly  but 
menacingly. He could not see  the hobbit, but now he was on  the alert, and he had 
other senses  that  the darkness had sharpened: hearing and smell. He seemed  to be 
crouched  right  down with  his  flat  hands  splayed  on  the  floor, and his head  thrust 

####-out, nose almost to the stone. Though he was only a black shadow in the gleam of 
his own eyes, Bilbo could see or feel that he was tense as a bowstring, gathered for 
a spring. 
Bilbo  almost  stopped  breathing,  and  went  stiff  himself. He was desperate. He 
must  get  away,  out  of  this  horrible  darkness,  while  he  had  any  strength  left.  He 
must  fight.  He  must  stab  the  foul  thing,  put  its  eyes  out,  kill  it.  It  meant  to  kill 
him.  No,  not  a  fair  fight.  He  was  invisible  now.  Gollum  had  no  sword. Gollum 
had  not  actually  threatened  to  kill  him,  or  tried  to  yet.  And  he  was  miserable, 
alone, lost. A sudden understanding, a pity mixed with horror, welled up in Bilbo's 
heart:  a  glimpse  of  endless  unmarked  days  without  light  or  hope  of  betterment, 
hard stone, cold fish, sneaking and whispering. All these thoughts passed in a flash 
of a second. He  trembled. And  then quite suddenly  in another flash, as  if  lifted by 
a new strength and resolve, he leaped. 
No great leap for a man, but a leap in the dark. Straight over Gollum's head he 
jumped,  seven  feet  forward  and  three  in  the  air;  indeed, had he known  it, he only 
just missed cracking his skull on the low arch of the passage. 
Gollum  threw  himself  backwards,  and  grabbed  as  the  hobbit  flew  over  him, 
but  too  late:  his  hands  snapped  on  thin  air,  and  Bilbo,  falling  fair  on  his  sturdy 
feet, sped off down the new tunnel. He did not turn to see what Gollum was doing. 
There was a hissing and cursing almost at his heels at  first,  then  it stopped. All at 
once  there  came  a  bloodcurdling  shriek,  filled  with  hatred  and  despair.  Gollum 
was defeated. He dared go no  further. He had  lost:  lost his prey, and  lost,  too,  the 
only thing he had ever cared for, his precious. The cry brought Bilbo's heart to his 
mouth,  but  still  he  held  on. Now  faint  as  an  echo,  but menacing,  the  voice  came 
behind: 
"Thief, thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it, we hates it, we hates it for ever!" 
Then  there was  a  silence. But  that  too  seemed menacing  to Bilbo.  "If  goblins 
are  so  near  that  he  smelt  them," he  thought, "then  they'll have heard his shrieking 
and cursing. Careful now, or this way will lead you to worse things." 
The passage was low and roughly made. It was not too difficult for the hobbit, 
except when,  in  spite of all care, he  stubbed his poor  toes again, several times, on 
nasty  jagged  stones  in  the  floor.  "A  bit  low  for  goblins,  at  least  for  the  big  ones," 
thought Bilbo,  not  knowing  that  even  the  big  ones,  the  ores  of  the mountains,  go 
along at a great speed stooping low with their hands almost on the ground. 
Soon the passage that had been sloping down began to go up again, and after a 
while  it  climbed  steeply.  That  slowed  Bilbo  down.  But  at  last  the  slope  stopped, 
the passage  turned a corner, and dipped down again, and  there, at  the bottom of a 

####-short  incline,  he  saw,  filtering  round  another  corner-a  glimpse  of  light.  Not  red 
light,  as  of  fire  or  lantern,  but  a  pale  out-of-doors  sort of  light. Then Bilbo began 
to run. 
Scuttling as fast as his legs would carry him he turned the last corner and came 
suddenly  right  into  an  open  space, where  the  light,  after  all  that  time  in  the  dark, 
seemed  dazzlingly  bright.  Really  it  was  only  a  leak  of  sunshine  in  through  a 
doorway, where a great door, a stone door, was left standing open. 
Bilbo  blinked,  and  then  suddenly  he  saw  the  goblins:  goblins  in  full  armour 
with drawn swords sitting just inside the door, and watching it with wide eyes, and 
watching the passage that led to it. They were aroused, alert, ready for anything. 
They saw him sooner than he saw them. Yes, they saw him. Whether it was .an 
accident,  or  a  last  trick  of  the  ring  before  it  took  a  new master,  it was  not  on  his 
finger. With yells of delight the goblins rushed upon him. 
A  pang  of  fear  and  loss,  like  an  echo  of  Gollum's  misery,  smote  Bilbo,  and 
forgetting even  to draw his sword he struck his hands  into his pockets. And- there 
was  the  ring  still,  in  his  left  pocket,  and  it  slipped  on  his  finger.  The  goblins 
stopped  short.  They  could  not  see  a  sign  of  him.  He  had  vanished.  They  yelled 
twice as loud as before, but not so delightedly.  
"Where is it?" they cried. 
"Go back up the passage!" some shouted. 
"This way!" some yelled. "That way!" others yelled. 
"Look out for the door," bellowed the captain. 
Whistles  blew,  armour  clashed,  swords  rattled,  goblins  cursed  and  swore  and 
ran hither and thither, falling over one another and getting very angry. There was a 
terrible outcry, to-do, and disturbance. 
Bilbo was  dreadfully  frightened,  but  he  had  the  sense  to  understand what  had 
happened and to sneak behind a big barrel which held drink for the goblin-guards, 
and  so  get  out  of  the  way  and  avoid  being  bumped  into,  trampled  to  death,  or 
caught by feel. 
"I must  get  to  the  door,  I must  get  to  the  door!"  he  kept  on  saying  to  himself, 
but  it was  a  long  time  before  he ventured  to  try. Then  it was  like a horrible game 
of  blind-man's  buff.  The  place  was  full  of  goblins  running  about,  and  the  poor 
little  hobbit  dodged  this  way  and  that,  was  knocked  over  by  a  goblin  who  could 
not  make  out  what  he  had  bumped  into,  scrambled  away  on  all  fours,  slipped 
between the legs of the captain just in time, got up, and ran for the door.  
It  was  still  ajar,  but  a  goblin  had  pushed  it  nearly  to.  Bilbo  struggled  but  he 
could  not  move  it.  He  tried  to  squeeze  through  the  crack.  He  squeezed  and 

####-squeezed, and he  stuck!  It was awful. His buttons had got wedged on  the edge of 
the  door  and  the  door-post.  He  could  see  outside  into  the  open  air:  there  were  a 
few  steps  running  down  into  a  narrow  valley  between  tall  mountains;  the  sun 
came  out  from  behind  a  cloud  and  shone  bright  on  the  outside  of  the  door-but he 
could not get through. 
Suddenly  one  of  the  goblins  inside  shouted:  "There  is  a  shadow  by  the  door. 
Something is outside!" 
Bilbo's  heart  jumped  into  his mouth. He  gave  a  terrific  squirm. Buttons burst 
off in all directions. He was through, with a torn coat and waistcoat, leaping down 
the steps  like a goat, while bewildered goblins were still picking up his nice brass 
buttons on the doorstep. 
Of course they soon came down after him, hooting and hallooing, and hunting 
among  the  trees. But  they  don't  like  the  sun:  it makes  their  legs wobble  and  their 
heads giddy. They could not find Bilbo with the ring on, slipping in and out of the 
shadow of  the  trees,  running quick and quiet, and keeping out of  the sun; so soon 
they went back grumbling and cursing to guard the door. Bilbo had escaped. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 6 </h4> <br>

Out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire 

 
Bilbo had escaped the goblins, but he did not know where he was. He had lost 
hood,  cloak,  food,  pony,  his  buttons  and  his  friends. He wandered  on  and  on,  till 
the  sun  began  to  sink westwards-behind  the mountains. Their shadows fell across 
Bilbo's  path,  and  he  looked  back.  Then  he  looked  forward  and  could  see  before 
him  only  ridges  and  slopes  falling  towards  lowlands  and  plains  glimpsed 
occasionally between the trees. 
"Good  heavens!"  he  exclaimed.  "I  seem  to  have  got  right  to  the  other  side  of 
the Misty Mountains,  right  to  the  edge  of  the Land Beyond! Where  and O where 
can  Gandalf  and  the  dwarves  have  got  to?  I  only  hope  to  goodness  they  are  not 
still back there in the power of the goblins!" 
He  still wandered on, out of  the  little high valley, over  its edge, and down  the 
slopes beyond; but all the while a very uncomfortable thought was growing inside 
him.  He  wondered  whether  he  ought  not,  now  he  had  the magic  ring,  to  go  back 
into  the  horrible,  horrible,  tunnels  and  look  for  his  friends.  He  had  just made  up 
his  mind  that  it  was  his  duty,  that  he  must  turn  back-and  very miserable  he  felt 
about it-when he heard voices. 
He  stopped  and  listened.  It  did  not  sound  like  goblins;  so  he  crept  forward 
carefully. He was  on  a  stony  path winding  downwards with  a  rocky wall.  on  the 
left hand; on the other side the ground sloped away and there were dells below the 
level  of  the  path  overhung with  bushes  and  low  trees.  In  one  of  these  dells  under 
the bushes people were talking. 
He crept still nearer, and suddenly he saw peering between  two big boulders a 
head with a red hood on:  it was Balin doing  look-out. He could have clapped and 
shouted  for  joy,  but  he  did  not.  He  had  still  got  the  ring  on,  for  fear  of  meeting 
something unexpected and unpleasant, and he saw that Balin was looking straight 
at him without noticing him. 
"I will  give  them  all  a  surprise,"  he  thought,  as  he  crawled  into  the  bushes at 
the edge of the dell. Gandalf was arguing with the dwarves. They were discussing 
all  that  had  happened  to  them  in  the  tunnels,  and  wondering  and  debating  what 
they were  to  do  now. The  dwarves were  grumbling,  and Gandalf was  saying  that 
they could not possibly go on with their journey leaving Mr. Baggins in the hands 
of  the  goblins,  without  trying  to  find  out  if  he  was  alive  or  dead,  and  without 
trying to rescue him. 

####-"After  all  he  is  my  friend,"  said  the  wizard,  "and  not  a  bad  little  chap.  I  feel 
responsible for him. I wish to goodness you had not lost him." 
The  dwarves  wanted  to  know  why  he  had  ever  been  brought  at  all,  why  he 
could not  stick  to his  friends  and  come  along with  them,  and why  the wizard had 
not chosen someone with more sense. "He has been more trouble than use so far," 
said  one.  "If  we  have  got  to'  go  back  now  into  those  abominable  tunnels  to  look 
for him, then drat him, I say." 
Gandalf answered angrily: "I brought him, and  I don't bring  things  that are of 
no use. Either you help me to look for him, or I go and leave you here to get out of 
the mess as best you can yourselves. If we can only find him again, you will thank 
me before all is over. Whatever did you want to go and drop him for, Dori?" 
"You would  have  dropped  him,"  said Dori,  "if a goblin had suddenly grabbed 
your  leg  from  behind  in  the  dark,  tripped  up  your  feet,  and  kicked  you  in  the 
back!" 
"Then why didn't you pick him up again?" 
"Good  heavens!  Can  you  ask!  Goblins  fighting  and  biting  in  the  dark, 
everybody falling over bodies  and hitting one another! You nearly chopped off my 
head  with  Glamdring,  and  Thorin Was  stabbing  here  there  and  everywhere  with 
Orcrist.  All  of  a  sudden  you  gave  one  of  your  blinding  flashes,  and  we  saw  the 
goblins running back yelping. You shouted 'follow me everybody!' and everybody 
ought  to  have  followed. We  thought  everybody  had. There was  no  time  to  count, 
as  you  know  quite  well,  till  we  had  dashed  through  the  gate-guards,  out  of  the 
lower  door,  and  helter-skelter  down  here.  And  here  we  are-without  the  burglar, 
confusticate him!" 
"And  here's  the  burglar!"  said  Bilbo  stepping  down  into  the  middle  of  them, 
and slipping off the ring. 
Bless  me,  how  they  jumped!  Then  they  shouted  with  surprise  and  delight. 
Gandalf was as astonished as any of  them, but probably more pleased than all the 
others. He called to Balin and told him what he thought of a look-out man who let 
people  walk  right  into  them  like  that  without  warning.  It  is  a  fact  that  Bilbo's 
reputation  went  up  a  very  great  deal  with  the  dwarves  after  this.  If  they had  still 
doubted  that  he  was  really  a  first-class  burglar,  in  spite  of Gandalf's words,  they 
doubted  no  longer. Balin was  the most  puzzled  of  all;  but  everyone  said  it was  a 
very clever bit of work. 
Indeed Bilbo was  so  pleased with  their  praise  that he just chuckled inside and 
said nothing whatever about  the  ring; and when  they asked him how he did  it, he 
said: "O, just crept along, you know-very carefully and quietly." 

####-"Well,  it  is  the  first  time  that  even  a  mouse  has  crept  along  carefully  and 
quietly  under my  very  nose  and  not  been  spotted,"  said Balin,  "and  I  take  off my 
hood to you." Which he did. 
"Balin at your service," said he. 
"Your servant, Mr. Baggins," said Bilbo. 
Then  they  wanted  to  know  all  about  his  adventures  after  they  had  lost  him, 
and  he  sat  down  and  told  them  everything-except  about  the  finding  of  the  ring 
("not  just  now"  he  thought).  They  were  particularly  interested  in  the  riddle-
competition, and shuddered most appreciatively at his description of Gollum. 
"And  then  I  couldn't  think  of  any  other  question with  him  sitting  beside me," 
ended Bilbo; "so I said  'what's in my pocket?' And he couldn't guess in three goes. 
So I said: 'what about your promise? Show me the way out!' But he came at me to 
kill  me,  and  I  ran,  and  fell  over,  and  he missed me  in  the  dark.  Then  I  followed 
him,  because  I  heard  him  talking  to  himself.  He  thought  I  really  knew  the  way 
out,  and  so  he  was  making  for  it.  And  then  he  sat  down  in  the  entrance,  and  I 
could not get by. So I jumped over him and escaped, and ran down to the gate." 
"What about guards?" they asked. "Weren't there any?" 
"O yes! lots of them; but I dodged 'em. I got stuck in the door, which was only 
open a crack, and  I  lost  lots of buttons," he  said  sadly  looking at his  torn clothes. 
"But I squeezed through all right-and here I am." 
The  dwarves  looked  at  him  with  quite  a  new  respect,  when  he  talked  about 
dodging  guards,  jumping  over  Gollum,  and  squeezing  through,  as  if  it  was  not 
very difficult or very alarming. 
"What  did  I  tell  you?"  said  Gandalf  laughing.  "Mr.  Baggins  has more  about 
him than you guess." He gave Bilbo a queer look from under his bushy eyebrows, 
as he said this, and the hobbit wondered if he guessed at the part of his tale that he 
had left out. 
Then he had questions of his own to ask, for if Gandalf had explained it all by 
now  to  the  dwarves,  Bilbo  had  not  heard  it.  He  wanted  to  know  how  the  wizard 
had turned up again, and where they had all got to now.  
The wizard, to tell the truth, never minded explaining his cleverness more than 
once, so now he had told Bilbo that both he and Elrond had been well aware of the 
presence of evil goblins  in  that part of  the mountains. But  their main gate used  to 
come out on a different pass, one more easy to travel by, so that they often caught 
people  benighted  near  their  gates. Evidently  people  had  given  up  going  that way, 
and  the  goblins  must  have  opened  their  new  entrance  at  the  top  of  the  pass  the 
dwarves had taken, quite recently, because it had been found quite safe up to now.  

####-"I must see if I can't find a more or less decent giant to block it up again," said 
Gandalf, "or soon there will be no getting over the mountains at all." 
As  soon  as Gandalf  had  heard Bilbo's  yell  he  realized what  had  happened.  In 
the flash which killed the goblins that were grabbing him he had nipped inside the 
crack, just as it snapped to. He followed after the drivers and prisoners right to the 
edge  of  the  great  hall,  and  there  he  sat  down  and  worked  up  the  best  magic  he 
could in the shadows. 
"A very ticklish business, it was," he said. "Touch and go!" 
But,  of  course,  Gandalf  had  made  a  special  study  of  bewitchments  with  fire 
and  lights (even  the hobbit had never forgotten  the magic fireworks at Old Took's 
midsummer-eve  parties,  as  you  remember).  The  rest  we  all  know  -  except  that 
Gandalf knew all about  the back-door, as the goblins called the lower gate, where 
Bilbo lost his buttons. As a matter of fact it was well known to anybody who was 
acquainted with this part of the mountains; but it took a wizard to keep his head in 
the tunnels and guide them in the right direction. 
"They made  that  gate  ages  ago,"  he  said,  "partly  for  a way  of  escape,  if  they 
needed one; partly as a way out into the lands beyond, where they still come in the 
dark and do great damage. They guard  it always and no one has ever managed to 
block it up. They will guard it doubly after this," he laughed. 
All  the  others  laughed  too.  After  all  they  had  lost  a  good  deal,  but  they  had 
killed the Great Goblin and a great many others besides, and they had all escaped, 
so they might be said to have had the best of it so far.  
But  the  wizard  called  them  to  their  senses.  "We  must  be  getting  on  at  once, 
now we  are  a  little  rested,"  he  said.  "They will  be  out  after  us  in  hundreds when 
night  comes  on;  and  already  shadows  are  lengthening.  They  can  smell  our 
footsteps  for  hours  and  hours  after  we  have  passed. We  must  be  miles  on  before 
dusk. There will be a bit of moon,  if  it keeps fine, and  that  is  lucky. Not  that  they 
mind the moon much, but it will give us a little light to steer by." 
"O yes!" he said  in answer  to more questions from  the hobbit. "You  lose  track 
of  time  inside  goblin-tunnels.  Today's  Thursday,  and  it  was  Monday  night  or 
Tuesday morning that we were captured. We have gone miles and miles, and come 
right down through the heart of the mountains, and are now on the other side-quite 
a short cut. But we are not at  the point  to which our pass would have brought us; 
we  are  too  far  to  the North,  and  have  some  awkward  country  ahead. And we  are 
still pretty high up. Let's get on!" 
 

####-"I  am  so dreadfully hungry," groaned Bilbo, who was  suddenly  aware  that he 
had  not  had  a meal  since  the  night  before  the  night  before  last.  Just  think  of  that 
for  a  hobbit!  His  stomach  felt  all  empty  and  loose  and  his  legs  all  wobbly,  now 
that the excitement was over.  
"Can't  help  it,"  said Gandalf,  "unless  you  like  to  go  back  and  ask  the  goblins 
nicely to let you have your pony back and your luggage." 
"No thank you!" said Bilbo. 
"Very well  then, we must  just  tighten our belts  and  trudge on  - or  we shall be 
made into supper, and that will be much worse than having none ourselves." 
As  they went  on  Bilbo  looked  from  side  to  side  for  something  to  eat;  but  the 
blackberries were  still  only  in  flower,  and  of  course  there were  no  nuts,  nor  even 
hawthorn-berries. He nibbled a bit of sorrel, and he drank from a small mountain-
stream that crossed the path, and he ate three wild strawberries that he found on its 
bank, but it was not much good. 
They  still  went  on  and  on.  The  rough  path  disappeared.  The  bushes,  and  the 
long  grasses,  between  the  boulders,  the  patches  of  rabbit-cropped  turf,  the  thyme 
and  the  sage  and  the  marjoram,  and  the  yellow  rockroses  all  vanished,  and  they 
found themselves at the top of a wide steep slope of fallen stones, the remains of a 
landslide.  When  they  began  to  go  down  this,  rubbish  and  small  pebbles  rolled 
away  from  their  feet;  soon  larger  bits  of  split  stone  went  clattering  down  and 
started  other  pieces  below  them  slithering  and  rolling;  then  lumps  of  rocks  were 
disturbed and bounded off, crashing down with a dust and a noise. Before long the 
whole  slope  above  them  and  below  them  seemed  on  the  move,  and  they  were 
sliding  away,  huddled  all  together,  in  a  fearful  confusion  of  slipping,  rattling, 
cracking slabs and stones. 
It  was  the  trees  at  the  bottom  that  saved  them.  They  slid  into  the  edge  of  a 
climbing  wood  of  pines  that  here  stood  right  up  the  mountain  slope  from  the 
deeper  darker  forests  of  the  valleys  below.  Some  caught  hold  of  the  trunks  and 
swung  themselves  into  lower  branches,  some  (like  the  little  hobbit)  got  behind  a 
tree to shelter from the onslaught of the rocks. Soon the danger was over, the slide 
had  stopped,  and  the  last  faint  crashes  could  be  heard  as  the  largest  of  the 
disturbed  stones  went  bounding  and  spinning  among  the  bracken  and  the  pine-
roots far below.  
"Well!  that  has  got  us  on  a  bit,"  said  Gandalf;  "and  even  goblins  tracking  us 
will have a job to come down here quietly." 

####-"I  daresay,"  grumbled Bombur;  "but  they won't  find  it  difficult  to  send  stones 
bouncing  down  on  our  heads."  The  dwarves  (and  Bilbo)  were  feeling  far  from 
happy, and were rubbing their bruised and damaged legs and feet. 
"Nonsense!  We  are  going  to  turn  aside  here  out  of  the  path  of  the  slide.  We 
must  be  quick! Look  at  the  light!" The  sun  had  long  gone behind  the mountains. 
Already  the  shadows  were  deepening  about  them,  though  far  away  through  the 
trees and over  the black  tops of  those growing  lower down  they could still see  the 
evening  lights  on  the  plains  beyond. They  limped  along  now  as  fast  as  they were 
able  down  the  gentle  slopes  of  a  pine  forest  in  a  slanting  path  leading  steadily 
southwards. At  times  they were pushing  through a sea of bracken with  tall  fronds 
rising  right  above  the  hobbit's  head;  at  times  they  were  marching  along  quiet  as 
quiet  over  a  floor  of  pine-needles;  and  all  the  while  the  forest-gloom got heavier 
and  the  forest-silence deeper. There was no wind that evening to bring even a sea-
sighing into the branches of the trees. 
 
"Must we go any further?" asked Bilbo, when it was so dark that he could only 
just  see  Thorin's  beard  wagging  beside  him,  and  so  quiet  that  he  could  hear  the 
dwarves'  breathing  like  a  loud  noise.  "My  toes  are  all  bruised  and  bent,  and  my 
legs ache, and my stomach is wagging like an empty sack." 
"A bit further," said Gandalf. 
After  what  seemed  ages  further  they  came  suddenly  to  an  opening  where  no 
trees  grew.  The  moon  was  up  and  was  shining  into  the  clearing.  Somehow  it 
struck  all of  them  as not  at  all  a nice place,  although  there was nothing wrong  to 
see. 
All  of a sudden  they heard a howl away down hill, a  long shuddering howl. It 
was  answered  by  another  away  to  the  right  and  a  good  deal  nearer  to  them;  then 
by  another  not  far  away  to  the  left.  It  was  wolves  howling  at  the  moon,  wolves 
gathering together! 
There were no wolves living near Mr. Baggins' hole at home, but he knew that 
noise.  He  had  had  it  described  to  him  often  enough  in  tales.  One  of  his  elder 
cousins  (on  the  Took  side),  who  had  been  a  great  traveller,  used  to  imitate  it  to 
frighten him. To hear  it  out  in  the forest under  the moon was  too much for Bilbo. 
Even  magic  rings  are  not  much  use  against  wolves-especially  against  the  evil 
packs that lived under the shadow of the goblin-infested mountains, over the Edge 
of  the Wild  on  the  borders  of  the  unknown. Wolves of  that sort smell keener  than 
goblins, and do not need to see you to catch you! 

####-"What  shall  we  do,  what  shall  we  do!"  he  cried.  "Escaping  goblins  to  be 
caught  by wolves!"  he  said,  and  it  became  a  proverb,  though we  now  say  'out  of 
the frying-pan into the fire' in the same sort of uncomfortable situations. 
"Up the trees quick!" cried Gandalf; and they ran to the trees at the edge of the 
glade,  hunting  for  those  that  had  branches  fairly  low,  or  were  slender  enough  to 
swarm  up.  They  found  them  as  quick  as  ever  they  could,  you  can  guess;  and  up 
they went as high as ever  they could  trust  the branches. You would have  laughed 
(from a safe distance), if you had seen the dwarves sitting up in the trees with their 
beards dangling down, like old gentlemen gone cracked and playing at being boys. 
Fili and Kili were at the top of a tall larch like an enormous Christmas tree. Dori, 
Nori,  On,  Oin,  and  Gloin  were  more  comfortable  in  a  huge  pine  with  regular 
branches  sticking  out  at  intervals  like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel.  Bifur,  Bofur, 
Bombur,  and  Thorin  were  in  another.  Dwalin  and  Balin  had  swarmed  up  a  tall 
slender fir with few branches and were  trying  to find a place  to sit  in  the greenery 
of  the  topmost  boughs.  Gandalf,  who  was  a  good  deal  taller  than  the  others,  had 
found  a  tree  into  which  they  could  not  climb,  a  large  pine  standing  at  the  very 
edge  of  the  glade. He was  quite  hidden  in  its  boughs,  but  you  could  see  his  eyes 
gleaming in the moon as he peeped out. 
And Bilbo? He could not get into any tree, and was scuttling about from trunk 
to trunk, like a rabbit that has lost its hole and has a dog after it. 
"You've left the burglar behind again}" said Nori to Dori looking down. 
"I  can't  be  always  carrying  burglars  on  my  back,"  said  Dori,  "down  tunnels 
and up trees! What do you think I am? A porter?" 
"He'll be eaten if we don't 'do something," said Thorin, for there were howls all 
around  them  now,  getting  nearer  and  nearer.  "Dori!"  he  called,  for  Dori  was 
lowest down in the easiest tree, "be quick, and give Mr. Baggins a hand up!" 
Dori was really a decent fellow in spite of his grumbling. Poor Bilbo could not 
reach  his  hand  even  when  he  climbed  down  to  the  bottom  branch  and  hung  his 
arm down as far as ever he could. So Dori actually climbed out of the tree and let 
Bilbo scramble up and stand on his back. 
Just  at  that  moment  the  wolves  trotted  howling  into  the  clearing.  All  of  a 
sudden  there  were  hundreds  of  eyes  looking  at  them.  Still  Dori  did  not  let  Bilbo 
down.  He  waited  till  he  had  clambered  off  his  shoulders  into  the  branches,  and 
then he jumped for the branches himself. Only just in time! A wolf snapped- at his 
cloak as he swung up, and nearly got him. In a minute there was a whole pack of 
them yelping all round  the  tree and  leaping up at  the  trunk, with eyes blazing and 
tongues hanging out. 

####-But  even  the  wild  Wargs  (for  so  the  evil  wolves  over  the  Edge  of  the  Wild 
were named) cannot climb  trees. For a  time  they were  safe.  'Luckily  it was warm 
and not windy. Trees are not very comfortable to sit in for long at any time; but in 
the  cold  and  the wind, with wolves  all  round  below waiting  for  you,  they  can  be 
perfectly miserable places. 
This  glade  in  the  ring  of  trees  was  evidently  a  meeting-place  of  the  wolves. 
More  and  more  kept  coming  in.  They  left  guards  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  in which 
Dori  and  Bilbo  were,  and  then  went  sniffling  about  till  they  had  smelt  out  every 
tree that had anyone in it. These they guarded too, while all the rest (hundreds and 
hundreds  it  seemed) went  and  sat  in  a  great  circle  in  the  glade;  and  in the middle 
of  the circle was a great grey wolf. He  spoke  to  them  in  the dreadful  language of 
the  Wargs.  Gandalf  understood  it.  Bilbo  did  not,  but  it  sounded  terrible  to  him, 
and  as  if  all  their  talk  was  about  cruel  and  wicked  things,  as  it  was.  Every  now 
and then all the Wargs in the circle would answer their grey chief all together, and 
their dreadful clamour almost made the hobbit fall out of his pine-tree. 
I  will  tell  you  what  Gandalf  heard,  though  Bilbo  did  not  understand  it.  The 
Wargs  and  the  goblins  often  helped  one  another  in wicked  deeds. Goblins  do  not 
usually venture very  far  from  their mountains, unless  they  are driven out  and  are 
looking  for  new  homes,  or  are marching  to  war  (which  I  am  glad  to  say  has  not 
happened for a long while). But in those days they sometimes used to go on raids, 
especially to get food or slaves to work for them. Then they often got the Wargs to 
help  and  shared  the  plunder with  them. Sometimes  they  rode  on wolves  like men 
do  on  horses.  Now  it  seemed  that  a  great  goblin-raid  had  been  planned  for  that 
very  night.  The  Wargs  had  come  to  meet  the  goblins  and  the  goblins  were  late. 
The  reason,  no  doubt,  was  the  death  of  the  Great  Goblin,  and  all  the  excitement 
caused  by  the  dwarves  and  Bilbo  and  the  wizard,  for  whom  they  were  probably 
still hunting. 
In spite of  the dangers of  this  far  land bold men had of  late been making  their 
way  back  into  it  from  the  South,  cutting  down  trees,  and  building  themselves 
places to live in among the more pleasant woods in the valleys and along the river-
shores. There were many of  them, and  they were brave and well-armed, and even 
the Wargs dared not attack  them  if  there were many  together, or  in  the bright day. 
But  now  they  had  planned with  the  goblins'  help  to  come  by  night  upon  some  of 
the  villages nearest  the mountains.  If  their plan had been carried out,  there would 
have been none  left  there next day;  all would have been killed  except  the  few  the 
goblins kept from the wolves and carried back as prisoners to their caves. 

####-This was dreadful talk to listen to, not only because of the brave woodmen and 
their  wives  and  children,  but  also  because  of  the  danger  which  now  threatened 
Gandalf  and his  friends. The Wargs were  angry  and puzzled  at  finding  them here 
in  their  very meeting-place. They  thought  they were  friends of  the woodmen, and 
were  come  to  spy  on  them,  and  would  take  news  of  their  plans  down  into  the 
valleys,  and  then  the  goblins  and  the wolves would  have  to  fight  a  terrible  battle 
instead  of  capturing  prisoners  and  devouring  people  waked  suddenly  from  their 
sleep. So  the Wargs  had  no  intention  of  going  away  and  letting  the  people  up  the 
trees escape, at any rate not until morning. And long before that, they said, goblin 
soldiers would be coming down  from  the mountains; and goblins can climb  trees, 
or cut them down. 
Now you can understand why Gandalf, listening to their growling and yelping, 
began  to be dreadfully afraid, wizard  though he was, and  to feel  that  they were  in 
a very bad place, and had not yet escaped at all. All  the same he was not going to 
let them have it all their own way, though he could not do very much stuck up in a 
tall  tree  with  wolves  all  round  on  the  ground  below.  He  gathered  the  huge 
pinecones  from  the  branches  of  his  tree.  Then  he  set  one  alight  with  bright  blue 
fire, and  threw  it whizzing down among  the circle of  the wolves.  It  struck one on 
the back, and  immediately his shaggy coat caught  fire, and he was  leaping  to and 
fro  yelping  horribly.  Then  another  came  and  another,  one  in  blue  flames,  one  in 
red,  another  in  green.  They  burst  on  the  ground  in  the  middle  of  the  circle  and 
went off in coloured sparks and smoke. A specially large one hit the chief wolf on 
the  nose,  and  he  leaped  in  the  air  ten  feet,  and  then  rushed  round  and  round  the 
circle biting and snapping even at the other wolves in his anger and fright. 
The  dwarves  and  Bilbo  shouted  and  cheered.  The  rage  of  the  wolves  was 
terrible  to  see,  and  the  commotion  they  made  filled  all  the  forest.  Wolves  are  
afraid of fire at all times, but this was a most horrible and uncanny fire. If a spark 
got  in  their coats  it stuck and burned  into  them, and unless  they  rolled over quick 
they  were  soon  all  in  flames.  Very  soon  all  about  the  glade  wolves  were  rolling 
over  and over  to put out  the  sparks on  their backs, while  those  that  were burning 
were running about howling and setting others alight, till their own friends chased 
them  away  and  they  fled  off  down  the  slopes  crying  and  yammering  and  looking 
for water.  
 
"What's  all  this  uproar  in  the  forest  tonight?"  said  the  Lord  of  the  Eagles. He 
was  sitting,  black  in  the moonlight,  on  the  top  of  a  lonely  pinnacle  of  rock  at  the 

####-eastern edge of  the mountains. "I hear wolves' voices! Are  the goblins at mischief 
in the woods?" 
He swept up  into  the air, and  immediately  two of his guards  from the rocks at 
either hand  leaped up  to  follow him. They circled up  in  the sky and  looked down 
upon  the  ring  of  the Wargs,  a  tiny  spot  far  far  below.  But  eagles  have  keen  eyes 
and  can  see  small  things  at  a  great  distance.  The  lord  of  the  eagles  of  the  Misty 
Mountains had eyes  that could  look at  the  sun unblinking, and could  see a  rabbit 
moving on the ground a mile below even in the moonlight. So though he could not 
see  the  people  in  the  trees,  he  could make  out  the  commotion  among  the wolves 
and  see  the  tiny  flashes  of  fire,  and  hear  the  howling  and  yelping  come  up  faint 
from far beneath him. Also he could see the glint of the moon on goblin spears and 
helmets,  as  long  lines  of  the wicked  folk  crept  down  the  hillsides  from  their  gate 
and wound into the wood. 
Eagles are not kindly birds. Some are cowardly and cruel. But the ancient race 
of  the  northern  mountains  were  the  greatest  of  all  birds;  they  were  proud  and 
strong and noble-hearted. They did not love goblins, or fear them. When they took 
any  notice  of  them at all (which was seldom, for they did not eat such creatures ), 
they  swooped on  them and drove  them  shrieking back  to  their caves, and  stopped 
whatever  wickedness  they  were  doing.  The  goblins  hated  the  eagles  and  feared 
them, but could not reach their lofty seats, or drive them from the mountains. 
Tonight  the  Lord  of  the  Eagles  was  filled  with  curiosity  to  know  what  was 
afoot;  so  he  summoned  many  other  eagles  to  him,  and  they  flew  away  from  the 
mountains,  and  slowly  circling  ever  round  and  round  they  came  down,  down, 
down towards the ring of the wolves and the meeting-place of the goblins. 
A  very  good  thing  too!  Dreadful  things  had  been  going  on  down  there.  The 
wolves  that  had  caught  fire  and  fled  into  the  forest  had  set  it  alight  in  several 
places.  It  was  high  summer,  and  on  this  eastern  side  of  the  mountains  there  had 
been little rain for some time. Yellowing bracken, fallen branches, deep-piled pine-
needles, and here and there dead trees, were soon in flames. All round the clearing 
of  the  Wargs  fire  was  leaping.  But  the  wolf-guards  did  not  leave  the  trees. 
Maddened and angry they were leaping and howling round the trunks, and cursing 
the  dwarves  in  their  horrible  language,  with  their  tongues  hanging  out,  and  their 
eyes shining as red and fierce as the flames. 
Then  suddenly  goblins  came  running  up  yelling.  They  thought  a  battle  with 
the  woodmen  was  going  on;  but  they  goon  learned  what  had  really  happened. 
Some  of  them  actually  sat  down  and  laughed.  Others  waved  their  spears  and 

####-clashed  the  shafts  against  their  shields.  Goblins  are  not  afraid  of  fire,  and  they 
soon had a plan which seemed to them most amusing. 
Some got all the wolves together in a pack. Some stacked fern and brushwood 
round  the  tree-trunks.  Others  rushed  round  and  stamped  and  beat,  and  beat  and 
stamped,  until  nearly  all  the  flames were  put  out-but  they did not put out  the  fire 
nearest  to  the  trees  where  the  dwarves  were.  That  fire  they  fed  with  leaves  and 
dead  branches  and  bracken.  Soon  they  had  a  ring  of  smoke  and  flame  all  round 
the dwarves, a ring which they kept from spreading outwards; but it closed slowly 
in,  till  the  running  fire  was  licking  the  fuel  piled  under  the  trees.  Smoke  was  in 
Bilbo's  eyes,  he  could  feel  the  heat  of  the  flames;  and  through  the  reek  he  could 
see  the  goblins  dancing  round  and  round  in  a  circle  like  people  round  a 
midsummer  bonfire.  Outside  the  ring  of  dancing  warriors  with  spears  and  axes 
stood the wolves at a respectful distance, watching and waiting. 
He could hear the goblins beginning a horrible song: 
 

Fifteen birds in five firtrees, 
their feathers were fanned in a fiery breeze! 
But, funny little birds, they had no wings! 
O what shall we do with the funny little things?  
Roast 'em alive, or stew them in a pot; 
fry them, boil them and eat them hot?  

 
Then  they  stopped  and  shouted  out:  "Fly  away  little  birds!  Fly  away  if  you 
can! Come down little birds, or you will get roasted in your nests! Sing, sing little 
birds! Why don't you sing?" 
"Go  away!  little  boys!"  shouted Gandalf  in  answer.  "It  isn't  bird-nesting time. 
Also naughty little boys that play with fire get punished." He said it to make them 
angry,  and  to  show  them  he was  not  frightened  of  them-though of course he was, 
wizard though he was. But they took no notice, and they went on singing. 
 

Burn, burn tree and fern! 
Shrivel and scorch! A fizzling torch 
To light the night for our delight, 
Ya hey! 
 
Bake and toast 'em, fry and roast 'em 
till beards blaze, and eyes glaze; 
till hair smells and skins crack, 
fat melts, and bones black 

####-in cinders lie 
beneath the sky! 
 
So dwarves shall die, 
and light the night for our delight, 
Ya hey! 
Ya-harri-heyl 
Ya hoy! 

 
And  with  that  Ya  hoy!  the  flames  were  under  Gandalf’s  tree.  In  a moment  it 
spread to the others. The bark caught fire, the lower branches cracked. 
Then  Gandalf  climbed  to  the  top  of  his  tree.  The  sudden  splendour  flashed 
from  his  wand  like  lightning,  as  he  got  ready  to  spring  down  from  on  high  right 
among  the spears of  the goblins. That would have been  the end of him,  though he 
would  probably  have  killed  many  of  them  as  he  came  hurtling  down  like  a 
thunderbolt. But he never leaped. 
Just at that moment the Lord of the Eagles swept down from above, seized him 
in his talons, and was gone. 
 
There was a howl of anger and surprise from the goblins. Loud cried the Lord 
of  the Eagles,  to whom Gandalf had now  spoken. Back  swept  the great birds  that 
were  with  him,  and  down  they  came  like  huge  black  shadows.  The  wolves 
yammered and gnashed  their  teeth;  the goblins yelled and stamped with  rage, and 
flung their heavy spears in the air in vain. Over them swooped the eagles; the dark 
rush of  their beating wings  smote  them  to  the  floor or drove  them  far  away;  their 
talons  tore  at  goblin  faces.  Other  birds  flew  to  the  tree-tops  and  seized  the 
dwarves, who were scrambling up now as far as ever they dared to go. 
Poor  little Bilbo was  very  nearly  left  behind  again! He  just managed  to  catch 
hold of Dori's legs, as Dori was borne off last of all; and they went together above 
the  tumult  and  the  burning,  Bilbo  swinging  in  the  air  with  his  arms  nearly 
breaking. 
Now  far below  the goblins and  the wolves were  scattering  far and wide  in  the 
woods. A few eagles were still circling and sweeping above the battle-ground. The 
flames about  the  trees sprang suddenly up above  the highest branches. They went 
up  in  crackling  fire.  There  was  a  sudden  flurry  of  sparks  and  smoke.  Bilbo  had 
escaped only just in time! 
Soon the light of the burning was faint below, a red twinkle on the black floor; 
and  they  were  high  up  in  the  sky,  rising  all  the  time  in  strong  sweeping circles. 

####-Bilbo  never  forgot  that  flight,  clinging  onto Dori's  ankles. He moaned  "my  arms, 
my arms!"; but Dori groaned "my poor legs, my poor legs!" 
At  the  best  of  times  heights  made  Bilbo  giddy.  He  used  to  turn  queer  if  he 
looked over the edge of quite a little cliff; and he had never liked ladders, let alone 
trees  (never  having  had  to  escape  from wolves  before).  So  you  can  imagine  how 
his head swam now, when he  looked down between his dangling  toes and saw  the 
dark  lands opening wide underneath him,  touched here and there with the light of 
the moon on a hill-side rock or a stream in the plains. 
The  pale  peaks  of  the mountains were  coming  nearer, moonlit  spikes  of  rock 
sticking  out  of  black  shadows.  Summer  or  not,  it  seemed  very  cold.  He  shut  his 
eyes  and wondered if he could hold on any longer. Then he imagined what would 
happen  if he did not. He  felt  sick. The  flight  ended only  just  in  time  for him,  just 
before  his  arms  gave  way.  He  loosed  Dori's  ankles  with  a  gasp  and  fell  onto  the 
rough  platform  of  an  eagle's  eyrie.  There  he  lay  without  speaking,  and  his 
thoughts were  a mixture  of  surprise  at  being  saved  from  the  fire,  and  fear  lest  he 
fell off that narrow place into the deep shadows on either side. He was feeling very 
queer indeed in his head by this time after the dreadful adventures of the last three 
days with next to nothing to eat, and he found himself saying aloud: "Now I know 
what a piece of bacon feels like when it is suddenly picked out of the pan on a fork 
and put back on the shelf!" 
"No  you  don't!"  be  heard  Dori  answering,  "because  the  bacon  knows  that  it 
will get back in the pan sooner or later; and it is to be hoped we shan't. Also eagles 
aren't forks!" 
"O  no!  Not  a  bit  like  storks-forks,  I mean,"  said Bilbo  sitting up  and  looking 
anxiously  at  the  eagle  who  was  perched  close  by.  He  wondered  what  other 
nonsense he had been  saying, and  if  the eagle would  think  it  rude. You ought not 
to  be  rude  to  an  eagle, when  you  are  only  the  size  of  a  hobbit,  and  are  up  in  his 
eyrie at night! 
The  eagle  only  sharpened  his  beak  on  a  stone  and  trimmed  his  feathers  and 
took no notice. 
Soon  another  eagle  flew  up.  "The  Lord  of  the  Eagles  bids  you  to  bring  your 
prisoners to the Great Shelf," he cried and was off again. The other seized Dori in 
his  claws  and  flew  away  with  him  into  the  night  leaving Bilbo  all  alone. He  had 
just strength  to wonder what  the messenger had meant by  'prisoners,' and  to begin 
to  think  of  being  torn  up  for  supper  like  a  rabbit,  when  his  own  turn  came.  The 
eagle came back, seized him in his talons by the back of his coat, and swooped off. 
This  time  he  flew  only  a  short  way.  Very  soon  Bilbo  was  laid  down,  trembling 

####-with  fear,  on  a wide  shelf  of  rock  on  the mountain-side. There was no path down 
on to it save by flying; and no path down off it except by jumping over a precipice. 
There  he  found  all  the  others  sitting  with  their  backs  to  the  mountain  wall.  The 
Lord of the Eagles also was there and was speaking to Gandalf. 
It  seemed  that  Bilbo  was  not  going  to  be  eaten  after  all.  The  wizard  and  the 
eagle-lord  appeared  to  know  one  another  slightly,  and  even  to  be  on  friendly 
terms. As a matter of fact Gandalf, who had often been in the mountains, had once 
rendered  a  service  to  the  eagles  and  healed  their  lord  from  an  arrow-wound. So 
you  see  'prisoners'  had  meant  'prisoners  rescued  from  the  goblins'  only,  and  not 
captives  of  the  eagles. As Bilbo  listened  to  the  talk  of Gandalf  he  realized  that  at 
last  they  were  going  to  escape  really  and  truly  from  the  dreadful  mountains.  He 
was  discussing  plans  with  the  Great  Eagle  for  carrying  the  dwarves  and  himself 
and Bilbo far away and setting  them down well on  their  journey across  the plains 
below.  
The Lord of  the Eagles would not  take  them anywhere near where men  lived. 
"They  would  shoot  at  us  with  their  great  bows  of yew," he  said,  "for  they would 
think  we  were  after  their  sheep.  And  at  other  times  they  would  be  right.  No!  we 
are  glad  to  cheat  the  goblins  of  their  sport,  and  glad  to  repay  our  thanks  to  you, 
but we will not risk ourselves for dwarves in the southward plains." 
"Very  well,"  said  Gandalf.  "Take  us  where  and  as  far  as  you  will!  We  are 
already deeply obliged to you. But in the meantime we are famished with hunger." 
"I am nearly dead of it," said Bilbo in a weak little voice that nobody heard. 
"That can perhaps be mended," said the Lord of the Eagles. 
Later on you might have seen a bright fire on  the shelf of rock and  the figures 
of the dwarves round it cooking and making a fine roasting smell. The eagles had 
brought  up  dry  boughs  for  fuel,  and  they  had  brought  rabbits, hares, and a  small 
sheep.  The  dwarves  managed  all  the  preparations.  Bilbo  was  too  weak  to  help, 
and  anyway  he was  not much  good  at  skinning  rabbits  or  cutting  up meat,  being 
used  to  having  it  delivered  by  the  butcher  all  ready  to  cook.  Gandalf,  too,  was 
lying  down  after  doing  his  part  in  setting  the  fire  going,  since Oin  and Gloin  had 
lost their tinder-boxes. (Dwarves have never taken to matches even yet.) 
So  ended  the  adventures  of  the  Misty  Mountains.  Soon  Bilbo's  stomach  was 
feeling full and  comfortable  again,  and he  felt he  could  sleep  contentedly,  though 
really  he  would  have  liked  a  loaf  and  butter  better  than  bits  of  meat  toasted  on 
sticks. He slept curled up on the hard rock more soundly than ever he had done on 
his feather-bed in his own  little hole at home. But all night he dreamed of his own 

####-house and wandered in his sleep into all his different rooms looking for something 
that he could not find nor remember what it looked like. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 7 </h4> <br>

Queer Lodgings 

 
The next morning Bilbo woke up with the early sun in his eyes. He jumped up 
to  look  at  the  time  and  to  go  and  put  his  kettle  on-and  found he was not home at 
all.  So  he  sat  down  and  wished  in  vain  for  a  wash  and  a  brush.  He  did  not  get 
either,  nor  tea  nor  toast  nor  bacon  for  his  breakfast, only cold mutton and  rabbit. 
And after that he had to get ready for a fresh start. 
This time he was allowed to climb on to an eagle's back and cling between his 
wings.  The  air  rushed  over  him  and  he  shut  his  eyes.  The  dwarves  were  crying 
farewells  and  promising  to  repay  the  lord  of  the  eagles  if  ever  they  could,  as  off 
rose  fifteen  great  birds  from  the  mountain's  side.  The  sun  was  still  close  to  the 
eastern  edge  of  things.  The morning was  cool,  and mists were  in  the  valleys  and 
hollows  and  twined  here  and  there  about  the  peaks  and  pinnacles  of  the  hills. 
Bilbo opened  an  eye  to peep  and  saw  that  the birds were  already high up  and  the 
world  was  far  away,  and  the  mountains  were  falling  back  behind  them  into  the 
distance. He shut his eyes again and held on tighter.  
"Don't pinch!" said his eagle. "You need not be frightened like a rabbit, even if 
you  look  rather  like  one.  It  is  a  fair morning  with  little  wind. What  is  finer  than 
flying?" 
Bilbo  would  have  liked  to  say:  "A  warm  bath  and  late  breakfast  on  the  lawn 
afterwards;"  but  he  thought  it  better  to  say  nothing  at  all,  and  to  let  go  his  clutch 
just a tiny bit. 
After  a good while  the  eagles must have  seen  the point  they were making  for, 
'even  from  their  great  height,  for  they  began  to  go  down  circling  round  in  great 
spirals. They did this for a long while, and at last the hobbit opened his eyes again. 
The earth was much nearer, and below  them were  trees  that  looked  like oaks and 
elms, and wide grass lands, and a river running through it all. But cropping out of 
the ground, right in the path of the stream which looped itself about it, was a great 
rock, almost a hill of stone,  like a  last outpost of  the distant mountains, or a huge 
piece cast miles into the plain by some giant among giants. 
Quickly  now  to  the  top  of  this  rock  the  eagles  swooped  one  by  one  and  set 
down their passengers. 
"Farewell!"  they  cried,  "wherever  you  fare,  till  your  eyries  receive  you  at  the 
journey's end!" That is the polite thing to say among eagles. 

####-"May  the  wind  under  your  wings  bear  you  where  the  sun  sails  and  the moon 
walks," answered Gandalf, who knew the correct reply.  
And so they parted. And though the lord of the eagles became in after days the 
King  of  All  Birds  and  wore  a  golden  crown,  and  his  fifteen  chieftains  golden 
collars  (made  of  the  gold  that  the  dwarves  gave  them),  Bilbo  never  saw  them 
again-except high and  far off  in  the battle of Five Armies. But as  that comes  in at 
the end of this tale we will say no more about it just now.  
There was a flat space on the top of the hill of stone and a well worn path with 
many steps leading down it to the river, across which a ford of huge flat stones led 
to  the  grass-land  beyond  the  stream.  There  was  a  little  cave  (a  wholesome  one 
with a pebbly floor) at the foot of the steps and near the end of the stony ford. Here 
the party gathered and discussed what was to be done. 
"I  always meant  to  see you  all  safe  (if possible) over  the mountains,"  said  the 
wizard,  "and  now  by  good management  and  good  luck  I  have  done  it.  Indeed we 
are  now  a  good  deal  further east than I ever meant to come with you, for after all 
this  is not my adventure.  I may  look  in on  it again before  it  is all over, but  in  the 
meanwhile I have some other pressing business to attend to." 
The  dwarves  groaned  and  looked  most  distressed,  and  Bilbo wept.  They  had 
begun to think Gandalf was going in come all the way and would always be there 
to  help  them  out  of  difficulties.  "I  am  not  going  to  disappear  this  very  instant," 
said  he.  "I  can  give  you  a  day  or  two more.  Probably  I  can  help  you  out of your 
present  plight,  and  I  need  a  little  help myself. We  have  no  food,  and  no  baggage, 
and no ponies to ride; and you don't know where you are. Now I can tell you that. 
You are still some miles north of the path which we should have been following, if 
we  had  not  left  the mountain  pass  in  a  hurry.  Very  few people  live  in  these parts, 
unless  they  have  come  here  since  I was  last  down  this way, which  is  some  years 
ago.  But  there  is  somebody  that  I  know  of,  who  lives  not  far  away.  That 
Somebody made the 
steps on the great rock-the Carrock I believe he calls it. He does not come here 
often,  certainly  not  in  the  daytime,  and  it  is  no  good  waiting  for  him.  In  fact  it 
would  be  very  dangerous. We  must  go  and  find  him;  and  if  all  goes  well  at  our 
meeting,  I  think I shall be off and wish you like the eagles  'farewell wherever you 
fare!' " 
They  begged  him  not  to  leave  them. They  offered  him  dragon-gold and silver 
and jewels, but he would not change his mind. 
"We  shall  see, we  shall  see!" he  said,  "and  I  think  I have earned already some 
of your dragon-gold - when you have got it." 

####- 
After that they stopped pleading. Then they took off their clothes and bathed in 
the river, which was shallow and clear and stony at the ford. When they had dried 
in the sun, which was now strong and warm, they were refreshed, if still sore and a 
little  hungry.  Soon  they  crossed  the  ford  (carrying  the  hobbit),  and  then  began  to 
march  through  the  long  green  grass  and  down  the  lines  of  the  wide-armed oaks 
and the tall elms. 
"And  why  is  it  called  the  Carrock?"  asked  Bilbo  as  he  went  along  at  the 
wizard's side. 
"He  called  it  the  Carrock,  because  carrock  is  his  word  for  it.  He  calls  things 
like  that  carrocks,  and  this  one  is  the Carrock  because  it  is  the  only  one  near  his 
home and he knows it well." 
"Who calls it? Who knows it?" 
"The  Somebody  I  spoke  of-a  very  great  person.  You  must  all  be  very  polite 
when  I  introduce  you.  I  shall  introduce  you  slowly,  two  by  two,  I  think;  and  you 
must  be  careful  not  to  annoy  him,  or  heaven  knows what will  happen. He can be 
appalling  when  he  is  angry,  though  he  is  kind  enough  if  humoured.  Still  I  warn 
you he gets angry easily." 
The dwarves all gathered round when they heard the wizard talking like this to 
Bilbo.  "Is  that  the  person  you  are  taking  us  to  now?"  they  asked.  "Couldn't  you 
find someone more easy-tempered? Hadn't you better explain it all a bit clearer?"-
and so on. 
"Yes  it  certainly  is!  No  I  could  not!  And  I  was  explaining  very  carefully," 
answered  the  wizard  crossly.  "If  you  must  know  more,  his  name  is  Beorn. He  is 
very strong, and he is a skin-changer." 
"What!  a  furrier,  a  man  that  calls  rabbits  conies,  when  he  doesn't  turn  their 
skins into squirrels?" asked Bilbo. 
"Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!" said Gandalf. "Don't be a fool Mr. 
Baggins  if you  can help  it; and  in  the name of all wonder don't mention  the word 
furrier  again  as  long  as  you  are  within  a  hundred  miles  of  his  house,  nor,  rug, 
cape,  tippet, muff, nor any other such unfortunate word! He  is a skin-changer. He 
changes  his  skin;  sometimes  he  is  a  huge  black  bear,  sometimes  he  is  a  great 
strong black-haired man with huge arms and a great beard. I cannot tell you much 
more,  though  that ought  to be enough. Some say  that he  is a bear descended from 
the  great  and  ancient  bears  of  the  mountains  that  lived  there  before  the  giants 
came. Others  say  that he  is  a man descended  from  the  first men who  lived before 
Smaug  or  the  other  dragons  came  into  this  part  of  the  world,  and  before  the 

####-goblins came into the hills out of the North. I cannot say, though I fancy the last is 
the true tale. He is not the sort of person to ask questions of. 
"At any rate he is under no enchantment but his own. He lives in an oak-wood 
and has a great wooden house; and as a man he keeps cattle and horses which are 
nearly  is marvellous  as himself. They work  for him  and  talk  to him. He does not 
eat  them;  neither  does  he  hunt  or  eat  wild  animals.  He  keeps  hives  and  hives  of 
great fierce bees, and  lives most on cream and honey. As a bear he ranges far and 
wide.  I  once  saw  him  sitting all alone on the top of the Carrock at night watching 
the  moon  sinking  towards  the  Misty  Mountains,  and  I  heard  him  growl  in  the 
tongue  of  bears;  'The  day  will  come  when  they  will  perish  and  I  shall  go  back!' 
That is why I believe he once came from the mountains himself." 
 
Bilbo and the dwarves had now plenty to think about, and they asked no more 
questions. They still had a long way to walk before them. Up slope and down dale 
they  plodded.  It  grew  very  hot.  Sometimes  they  rested  under  the  trees,  and  then 
Bilbo felt so hungry that he would have eaten acorns, if any had been ripe enough 
yet to have fallen to the ground. 
It  was  the  middle  of  the  afternoon  before  they  noticed  that  great  patches  of 
flowers had begun to spring up, all the same kinds growing together as if they had 
been  planted.  Especially  there  was  clover,  waving  patches  of  cockscomb  clover, 
and  purple  clover,  and wide  stretches  of  short white  sweet  honey-smelling clover. 
There  was  a  buzzing  and  a  whirring  and  a  droning  in  the  air.  Bees  were  busy 
everywhere. And such bees! Bilbo had never seen anything like them. 
"If one was to sting me," he thought, "I should swell up as big again as I am!" 
They  were  bigger  than  hornets.  The  drones  were  bigger  than  your  thumb,  a 
good  deal,  and  the  bands  of  yellow  on  their  deep  black  bodies  shone  like  fiery 
gold. 
"We are getting near," said Gandalf. "We are on the edge of his bee-pastures." 
After  a  while  they  came  to  a  belt  of  tall  and  very  ancient  oaks,  and  beyond 
these to a high thorn-hedge through which you could neither see nor scramble. 
"You had better wait here," said the wizard to the dwarves; "and when I call or 
whistle  begin  to  come  after  me —  you  will  see  the  way  I  go-but  only  in  pairs, 
mind, about  five minutes between each pair of you. Bombur  is  fattest  and will do 
for two, he had better come alone and last. Come on Mr. Baggins! There is a gate 
somewhere round this way." And with that he went off along the hedge taking the 
frightened hobbit with him. 

####-They  soon  came  to  a wooden  gate,  high  and  broad,  beyond which  they could 
see  gardens  and  a  cluster  of  low  wooden  buildings,  some  thatched  and  made  of 
unshaped logs; barns, stables, sheds, and a long low wooden house. 
Inside  on  the  southward  side  of  the  great  hedge were  rows  and  rows  of  hives 
with  bell-shaped  tops made of  straw. The noise of  the giant bees  flying  to and  fro 
and crawling in and out filled all the air.  
The  wizard  and  the  hobbit  pushed  open  the  heavy  creaking  gate  and  went 
down a wide track towards the house. Some horses, very sleek and well-groomed, 
trotted up across  the grass and  looked at  them  intently with very  intelligent  faces; 
then off they galloped to the buildings. 
"They have gone to tell him of the arrival of strangers," said Gandalf. 
Soon  they  reached  a  courtyard,  three  walls  of  which  were  formed  by  the 
wooden  house  and  its  two  long wings.  In  the middle  there was  lying  a  great  oak-
trunk with many  lopped branches beside  it. Standing near was a huge man with a 
thick black beard and' hair, and great bare arms and legs with knotted muscles. He 
was clothed in a tunic of wool down to his knees, and was leaning on a large axe. 
The horses were standing by him with their noses at his shoulder.  
"Ugh!  here  they  are!"  he  said  to  the  horses.  "They  don't  look  dangerous. You 
can be off!" He laughed a great rolling laugh, put down his axe and came forward. 
"Who  are  you  and what  do  you want?"  he  asked  gruffly,  standing  in  front  of 
them and towering tall above Gandalf. 
As for Bilbo he could easily have  trotted  through his  legs without ducking his 
head to miss the fringe of the man's brown tunic. 
"I am Gandalf," said the wizard. 
"Never  heard  of  him,"  growled  the  man,  "And  what's  this  little  fellow?"  he 
said, stooping down to frown at the hobbit with his bushy eyebrows. 
"That is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good family and unimpeachable reputation," 
said Gandalf. Bilbo bowed. He had no hat to take off, and was painfully conscious 
of his many missing buttons. "I am a wizard," continued Gandalf. "I have heard of 
you,  if you have not heard of me; but perhaps you have heard of my good cousin 
Radagast who lives near the Southern borders of Mirkwood?" 
"Yes;  not  a  bad  fellow  as  wizards  go,  I  believe.  I  used  to  see  him  now  and 
again,"  said  Beorn.  "Well,  now  I  know  who  you  are,  or  who  you  say  you  are. 
What do you want?" 
"To  tell  you  the  truth, we  have  lost  our  luggage  and  nearly  lost  our way,  and 
are  rather  in need of help, or  at  least  advice.  I may  say we have had  rather  a bad 
time with goblins in the mountains." 

####-"Goblins?" said the big man less gruffly. "O ho, so you've been  having trouble 
with them have you? What did you go near them for?" 
"We  did  not  mean  to.  They  surprised  us  at  night  in  a  pass  which  we  had  to 
cross, we were coming out of the Lands over West into these countries-it is a long 
tale." 
"Then  you  had  better  come  inside  and  tell  me  some  of  it,  if  it  won't  take  all 
day,"  said  the  man  leading  the  way  through  a  dark  door  that  opened  out  of  the 
courtyard into the house. 
Following  him  they  found  themselves  in  a  wide  hall  with  a  fire-place  in  the 
middle. Though  it was summer there was a wood-fire burning and the smoke was 
rising  to  the blackened  rafters  in  search of  the way out  through  an opening  in  the 
roof. They passed  through  this dim hall,  lit only by  the  fire and  the hole above  it, 
and came  through another smaller door into a sort of veranda propped on wooden 
posts made  of  single  tree-trunks. It faced south and was still warm and filled with 
the  light  of  the westering  sun which  slanted  into  it,  and  fell  golden  on  the  garden 
full of flowers that came right up to the steps. 
Here  they  sat  on  wooden  benches  while  Gandalf  began  his  tale,  and  Bilbo 
swung his dangling  legs and  looked at  the  flowers  in  the garden, wondering what 
their names could be, as he had never seen half of them before. 
"I was coming over the mountains with a friend or two…" said the wizard. 
"Or two? I can only see one, and a little one at that," said Beorn. 
"Well  to  tell you  the  truth,  I did not  like  to bother you with a  lot of us, until  I 
found out if you were busy. I will give a call, if I may." 
"Go on, call away!" 
So  Gandalf  gave  a  long  shrill  whistle,  and  presently  Thorin  and  Dori  came 
round the house by the garden path and stood bowing low before them. 
"One or three you meant, I see!" said Beorn. "But these aren't hobbits, they are 
dwarves!" 
"Thorin  Oakenshield,  at  your  service!  Dori  at  your  service!"  said  the  two 
dwarves bowing again. 
"I  don't  need  your  service,  thank  you,"  said  Beorn,  "but  I  expect  you  need 
mine.  I  am  not  over  fond  of  dwarves;  but  if  it  is  true  you  are  Thorin  (son  of 
Thrain, son of  Thror,  I believe), and  that your companion  is  respectable, and  that 
you  are  enemies  of  goblins  and  are  not  up  to  any  mischief  in  my  lands-what are 
you up to, by the way?" 
"They  are  on  their  way  to  visit  the  land  of  their  fathers,  away  east  beyond 
Mirkwood,"  put  in  Gandalf,  "and  it  is  entirely  an  accident  that  we  are  in  your 

####-lands at all. We were crossing by the High Pass that should have brought us to the 
road  that  lies  to  the  south  of  your  country,  when  we  were  attacked  by  the  evil 
goblins-as I was about to tell you." 
"Go on telling, then!" said Beorn, who was never very polite. 
"There was a terrible storm; the stone-giants were out hurling rocks, and at the 
head  of  the  pass  we  took  refuge  in  a  cave,  the  hob  bit  and  I  and  several  of  our 
companions…" 
"Do you call two several?" 
"Well, no. As a matter of fact there were more than two." 
"Where are they? Killed, eaten, gone home?" 
"Well,  no.  They  don't  seem  all  to  have  come  when  I  whistled.  Shy,  I  expect. 
You see, we are very much afraid that we are rather a lot for you to entertain." 
"Go on, whistle again! I am in for a party, it seems, and one or two more won't 
make much difference," growled Beorn. 
Gandalf  whistled  again;  but  Nori  and  Ori  were  there  almost  before  he  had 
stopped,  for,  if  you  remember, Gandalf  had  told  them  to  come  in pairs  every  five 
minutes. 
"Hullo!"  said  Beorn.  "You  came  pretty  quick-where were  you  hiding? Come 
on my jack-in-the-boxes!" 
"Nori at your service, Ori at . . ." they began; but Beorn interrupted them. 
"Thank you! When I want your help I will ask for it. Sit down, and let's get on 
with this tale, or it will be supper-time before it is ended." 
"As soon as we were asleep," went on Gandalf, "a crack at the back of the cave 
opened;  goblins  came  out  and  grabbed  the  hobbit  and  the  dwarves  and our  troop 
of ponies—" 
"Troop  of  ponies?  What  were  you-a  travelling  circus? Or were  you  carrying 
lots of goods? Or do you always call six a troop?" 
"O  no!  As  a  matter  of  fact  there  were  more  than  six  ponies,  for  there  were 
more  than  six  of  us-and well,  here  are  two more!"  Just  at  that moment Balin  and 
Dwalin appeared and bowed so low that their beards swept the stone floor. The big 
man was frowning at first, but  they did  their very best  to be frightfully polite, and 
kept  on  nodding  and  bending  and  bowing  and  waving  their  hoods  before  their 
knees  (in  proper  dwarf-fashion),  till  he  stopped  frowning  and  burst  into  a 
chuckling laugh; they looked so comical. 
"Troop, was  right,"  he  said.  "A  fine  comic  one.  Come  in my merry men,  and 
what  are  your  names?  I  don't  want  your  service  just  now,  only  your  names;  and 
then sit down and stop wagging!" 

####-"Balin  and  Dwalin,"  they  said  not  daring  to  be  offended,  and  sat  flop  on  the 
floor looking rather surprised. 
"Now go on again!" said Beorn to the wizard. 
"Where  was  1?  O  yes—  I  was  not  grabbed.  I  killed  a  goblin  or  two  with  a 
flash—" 
"Good!" growled Beorn. "It is some good being a wizard, then." 
"—and slipped inside the crack before it closed. I followed down into the main 
hall, which was  crowded with  goblins. The Great Goblin was  there with  thirty or 
forty armed guards. I thought to myself 'even if they were not all chained together, 
what can a dozen do against so many?' " 
"A  dozen!  That's  the  first  time  I've  heard  eight  called  a  dozen.  Or  have  you 
still got some more jacks that haven't yet come out of their boxes?" 
"Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more here now – Fili and Kili, I believe," 
said Gandalf, as these two now appeared and stood smiling and bowing. 
"That's enough!" said Beorn. "Sit down and be quiet! Now go on, Gandalf!" 
So  Gandalf  went  on  with  the  tale,  until  he  came  to  the  fight  in  the  dark,  the 
discovery  of  the  lower  gate,  and  their  horror  when  they  found  that  Mr.  Baggins 
had been mislaid. 
"We  counted  ourselves  and  found  that  there  was  no  hobbit.  There  were  only 
fourteen of us left!" 
"Fourteen!  That's  the  first  time  I've  heard  one  from  ten  leave  fourteen.  You 
mean nine, or else you haven't told me yet all the names of your party." 
"Well, of course you haven't seen Oin and Gloin yet. And, bless me! here they 
are. I hope you will forgive them for bothering you." 
"O  let  'em all come! Hurry up! Come along, you  two, and sit down! But  look 
here, Gandalf, even now we have only got yourself and ten dwarves and the hobbit 
that was  lost. That  only makes  eleven  (plus  one mislaid) and not fourteen, unless 
wizards  count  differently  to  other  people.  But  now  please  get  on  with  the  tale." 
Beorn did not show it more than he could help, but really he had begun to get very 
interested. You  see,  in  the  old  days  he  had  known  the  very  part of  the mountains 
that  Gandalf  was  describing.  He  nodded  and  he  growled,  when  he  heard  of  the 
hobbit's  reappearance  and  of  their  scramble  down  the  stone-slide  and  of  the wolf-
ring m the woods. When Gandalf came to their climbing into trees with the wolves 
all underneath, he got up and strode about and muttered: 
"I wish I had been there! I would have given them more than fireworks!" 
"Well,"  said  Gandalf  very  glad  to  see  that  his  tale  was  making  a  good 
impression,  "I  did  the  best  I  could.  There  we  were  with  the  wolves  going  mad 

####-underneath us  and  the  forest beginning  to blaze  in places, when  the goblins  came 
down  from  the  hills  and  discovered  us.  They  yelled  with  delight  and  sang  songs 
making fun of us. Fifteen birds in five fir-trees…" 
"Good heavens!" growled Beorn. "Don't pretend that goblins can't count. They 
can. Twelve isn't fifteen and they know it." 
"And  so  do  1.  There  were  Bifur  and  Bofur  as  well.  I  haven't  ventured  to 
introduce them before, but here they are." 
In  came  Bifur  and  Bofur.  "And  me!"  gasped  Bombur  pulling  up  behind.  He 
was  fat, and also angry at being  left  till  last. He  refused  to wait  five minutes, and 
followed immediately after the other two. 
"Well, now there are fifteen of you; and since goblins can count, I suppose that 
is  all  that  there  were  up  the  trees.  Now  perhaps  we  can  finish  this  story  without 
any more interruptions." Mr. Baggins saw then how clever Gandalf had been. The 
interruptions had really made Beorn more interested in the story, and the story had 
kept  him  from  sending  the  dwarves off  at once  like  suspicious beggars. He never 
invited people into his house, if he could help it. He had very few friends and they 
lived  a  good  way  away;  and  he  never  invited  more  than  a  couple  of  these  to  his 
house at a time. Now he had got fifteen strangers sitting in his porch! 
By  the  time  the wizard had  finished his  tale  and had  told of  the  eagles'  rescue 
and of how they had all been brought to the Carrock, the sun had fallen behind the 
peaks of the Misty Mountains and the shadows were long in Beorn's garden. 
"A  very  good  tale!"  said  he.  "The  best  I  have  heard  for  a  long  while.  If  all 
beggars  could  tell  such  a  good  one,  they  might  find  me  kinder.  You  may  be 
making  it  all  up,  of  course,  but  you  deserve  a  supper  for  the  story  all  the  same. 
Let's have something to eat!" 
"Yes, please!" they all said together. "Thank you very much!" 
Inside  the  hall  it was  now  quite  dark. Beorn  clapped  his  hands,  and  in  trotted 
four  beautiful  white  ponies  and  several  large  long-bodied  grey  dogs.  Beorn  said 
something  to  them  in  a  queer  language  like  animal  noises  turned  into  talk.  They 
went  out  again  and  soon  came  back  carrying  torches  in  their mouths, which  they 
lit  at  the  fire  and  stuck  in  low brackets on  the pillars of  the hall  about  the  central 
hearth. 
The  dogs  could  stand  on  their  hind-legs  when  they  wished,  and  carry  things 
with  their  fore-feet.  Quickly  they  got  out  boards  and  trestles  from  the  side  walls 
and set them up near the fire. 
Then  baa-baa-baa!  was  heard,  and  in  came  some  snow-white  sheep  led  by  a 
large  coal-black  ram.  One  bore  a  white  cloth  embroidered  at  the  edges  with 

####-figures of animals; others bore on  their broad backs  trays with bowls and platters 
and knives and wooden spoons, which the dogs took and quickly laid on the trestle 
tables.  These  were  very  low,   low  enough  even  for  Bilbo  to  sit  at  comfortably. 
Beside  them  a  pony  pushed  two  low-seated  benches  with  wide  rush-bottoms and 
little  short  thick  legs  for Gandalf  and Thorin, while  at  the  far  end  he  put Beorn's 
big  black  chair  of  the  same  sort  (in which  he  sat with his great  legs  stuck  far out 
under the table). These were all the chairs he had in his hall, and he probably had 
them  low  like  the  tables for  the convenience of  the wonderful animals  that waited 
on him. What did  the  rest sit on? They were not  forgotten. The other ponies came 
in  rolling  round  drum-shaped  sections  of  logs,  smoothed  and  polished,  and  low 
enough  even  for Bilbo;  so  soon  they were  all  seated  at Beorn's  table,  and  the hall 
had not seen such a gathering for many a year.  
There  they  had  a  supper, or  a dinner,  such  as  they had not had  since  they  left 
the Last Homely House  in  the West and  said good-bye to Elrond. The light of the 
torches  and  the  fire  flickered  about  them,  and  on  the  table  were  two  tall  red 
beeswax candles. All the time they ate, Beorn in his deep rolling voice told tales of 
the  wild  lands  on  this  side  of  the  mountains,  and  especially  of  the  dark  and 
dangerous wood,  that  lay  outstretched  far  to North  and  South  a  day's  ride  before 
them, barring their way to the East, the terrible forest of Mirkwood. 
The  dwarves  listened  and  shook  their  beards,  for  they  knew  that  they  must 
soon  venture  into  that  forest  and  that  after  the mountains  it  was  the  worst  of  the 
perils  they  had  to  pass  before  they  came  to  the  dragon's  stronghold. When  dinner 
was  over  they  began  to  tell  tales  of  their  own,  but  Beorn  seemed  to  be  growing 
drowsy  and  paid  little  heed  to  them.  They  spoke  most  of  gold  and  silver  and 
jewels  and  the making  of  things  by  smith-craft,  and Beorn did not  appear  to  care 
for  such  things:  there were no things of gold or silver in his hall, and few save the 
knives were made of metal at all. 
They  sat  long  at  the  table with  their wooden  drinking-bowls filled with mead. 
The dark night came on outside. The fires in the middle of the hall were built with 
fresh logs and the torches were put out, and still they sat in the light of the dancing 
flames with  the pillars of  the house standing  tall behind  them, arid dark at  the  top 
like  trees  of  the  forest.  Whether  it  was  magic  or  not,  it  seemed  to  Bilbo  that he 
heard  a  sound  like  wind  in  the  branches  stirring  in  the  rafters,  and  the  hoot  of 
owls.  Soon  he  began  to  nod  with  sleep  and  the  voices  seemed  to  grow  far  away, 
until he woke with a start. 
The great door had creaked and slammed. Beorn was gone. The dwarves were 
sitting  cross-legged  on  the  floor  round  the  fire,  and  presently  they  began  to  sing. 

####-Some  of  the  verses  were  like  this,  but  there  were  many  more,  and  their  singing 
went on for a long while: 
 

####-The wind was on the withered heath, 
but in the forest stirred no leaf: 
there shadows lay by night and day,  
and dark things silent crept beneath. 
The wind came down from mountains cold, 
and like a tide it roared and rolled; 
the branches groaned, the forest moaned, 
and leaves were laid upon the mould. 
 
The wind went on from West to East ;  
all movement in the forest ceased, 
but shrill and harsh across the marsh  
its whistling voices were released. 
 
The grasses hissed, their tassels bent, 
the reeds were rattling-on it went 
o' er shaken pool under heavens cool 
where racing clouds were torn and rent. 
 
It passed the lonely Mountain bare  
and swept above the dragon's lair :  
there black and dark lay boulders stark 
and flying smoke was in the air.  
 
It left the world and took its flight 
over the wide seas of the night. 
The moon set sail upon the gale, 
and stars were fanned to leaping light. 

 
Bilbo  began  to  nod  again.  Suddenly  up  stood  Gandalf.  "It  is  time  for  us  to 
sleep,"  be  said,  "—for us, but not I think for Beorn. In this hall we can rest sound 
and  safe,  but  I  warn  you  all  not  to  forget what  Beorn  said  before  he  left  us:  you 
must not stray outside until the sun is up, on your peril." 
Bilbo found that beds had already been laid at the side of the hall, on a sort of 
raised  platform  between  the  pillars  and  the  outer  wall.  For  him  there was  a  little 
mattress  of  straw  and  woollen  blankets.  He  snuggled  into  them  very  gladly, 
summertime though it was. The fire burned low and he fell asleep. Yet in the night 
he woke: the fire had now sunk to a few embers; the dwarves and Gandalf were all 
asleep,  to  judge  by  their  breathing;  a  splash  of  white  on  the  floor  came  from  the 
high moon, which was peering down through the smoke-hole in the roof. 

####-There  was  a  growling  sound  outside,  and  a  noise  as  of  some  great  animal 
scuffling  at  the  door. Bilbo .wondered what it was, and whether it could be Beorn 
in enchanted shape, and if he would come in as a bear and kill them. 
He  dived  under  the  blankets  and  hid  his  head,  and  fell  asleep  again  at  last  in 
spite of his fears. 
It was full morning when he awoke. One of the dwarves had fallen over him in 
the shadows where he lay, and had rolled down with a bump from the platform on 
to  the  floor.  It was Bofur,  and he was grumbling  about  it, when Bilbo opened his 
eyes. 
"Get up lazybones," he said, "or there will be no breakfast left for you." 
Up jumped Bilbo. "Breakfast!" he cried. "Where is breakfast?" 
"Mostly  inside us,"  answered  the other dwarves who were moving  around  the 
hall; "but what is left is out on the veranda. We have been about looking for Beorn 
ever  since  the  sun got up; but  there  is no  sign of him anywhere,  though we  found 
breakfast laid as soon as we went out." 
"Where is Gandalf?" asked Bilbo, moving off to find something to eat as quick 
as he could. 
"O!  out  and  about  somewhere,"  they  told  him.  But  he  saw  no  sign  of  the 
wizard  all  that  day  until  the  evening.  Just  before  sunset  he  walked  into  the  hall, 
where  the  hobbit  and  the  dwarves  were  having  supper,  waited  on  by  Beorn's 
wonderful  animals,  as  they  had  been  all  day.  Of  Beorn  they  had  seen  and  heard 
nothing since the night before, and they were getting puzzled. 
"Where is our host, and where have you been all day yourself?" they all cried. 
"One  question  at  a  time-and  none  till  after  supper!  I  haven't  had  a  bite  since 
breakfast." 
At  last  Gandalf  pushed  away  his  plate  and  jug  —  he  had  eaten  two  whole 
loaves  (with masses  of  butter  and  honey  and  clotted  cream)  and  drunk  at  least  a 
quart  of mead  and  he  took  out  his  pipe.  "I will  answer  the  second  question  first," 
he said, "-but bless me! this is a splendid place for smoke rings!" Indeed for a long 
time they could get nothing more out of him, he was so busy sending smoke-rings 
dodging  round  the  pillars  of  the  hall,  changing  them  into  all  sorts  of  different 
shapes and colours, and setting  them at  last chasing one another out of the hole in 
the roof. 
They must have  looked very queer  from outside, popping out  into  the  air one 
after another, green, blue, red, silver-grey, yellow, white; big ones, little ones; little 
ones dodging  through big ones  and  joining  into  figure-eights, and going off like a 
flock of birds into the distance. 

####-"I have been picking out bear-tracks," he said at last. "There must have been a 
regular  bears'  meeting  outside  here  last  night.  I  soon  saw  that  Beorn  could  not 
have  made  them  all:  there  were  far  too many  of  them,  and  they  were  of  various 
sizes  too.  I  should  say  there  were  little  bears,  large  bears,  ordinary  bears,  and 
gigantic big bears, all dancing outside from dark to nearly dawn. They came from 
almost every direction, except from the west over the river, from the Mountains. In 
that  direction  only  one  set  of  footprints  led-none  coming,  only  ones  going  away 
from here. 
I  followed  these  as  far  as  the  Carrock.  There  they  disappeared  into  the  river, 
but  the water was  too  deep  and  strong  beyond  the  rock  for me  to  cross.  It  is  easy 
enough, as you remember, to get from this bank to the Carrock by the ford, but on 
the  other  side  is  a  cliff  standing  up  from  a  swirling  channel.  I  had  to  walk miles 
before  I  found  a  place  where  the  river  was  wide  and  shallow  enough  for  me  to 
wade  and  swim,  and  then  miles  back  again  to  pick  up  the  tracks  again.  By  that 
time  it  was  too  late  for  me  to  follow  them  far.  They  went  straight  off  in  the 
direction of the pine-woods on the east side of the Misty Mountains, where we had 
our  pleasant  little  party  with  the  Wargs  the  night  before  last.  And  now  I  think  I 
have  answered  your  first  question,  too,"  ended  Gandalf,  and  he  sat  a  long  while 
silent. 
Bilbo  thought  he  knew what  the wizard meant.  "What  shall we  do,"  he  cried, 
"if  he  leads  all  the Wargs  and  the  goblins  down  here? We  shall  all  be  caught  and 
killed! I thought you said he was not 9 friend of theirs." 
"So I did. And don't be silly! You had better go to bed, your wits are sleepy." 
The hobbit felt quite crushed, and as there seemed nothing else to do he did go 
to  bed;  and  while  the  dwarves  were  still  singing  songs  he  dropped  asleep,  still 
puzzling his little head about Beorn, till he dreamed a dream of hundreds of black 
bears  dancing  slow  heavy  dances  round  and  round  in  the  moonlight  in  the 
courtyard.  Then  he  woke  up  when  everyone  else  was  asleep,  and  he  heard  the 
same  scraping,  scuffling,  snuffling,  and  growling  as  before.  Next  morning  they 
were all wakened by Beorn himself. 
"So here you all are still!" he said. He picked up the hobbit and laughed: "Not 
eaten  up  by  Wargs  or  goblins  or  wicked  bears  yet  I  see";  and  he  poked  Mr. 
Baggins' waistcoat most disrespectfully. "Little bunny is getting nice and fat again 
on bread and honey," he chuckled. "Come and have some more!" 
 
So  they  all  went  to  breakfast  with  him.  Beorn  was  most  jolly  for  a  change; 
indeed  he  seemed  to  be  in  a  splendidly  good  humour  and  set  them  all  laughing 

####-with his funny stories; nor did they have to wonder long where he had been or why 
he  was  so  nice  to  them,  for he  told  them himself. He had been over  the  river  and 
right  back  up  into  the  mountains-from  which  you  can  guess  that  he  could  travel 
quickly,  in bear's  shape  at  any  rate. From  the burnt wolf-glade he had soon found 
out  that  part  of  their  story  was  true;  but  he  had  found  more  than  that:  he  had 
caught a Warg and a goblin wandering in the woods. From these he had got news: 
the  goblin  patrols  were  still  hunting  with  Wargs  for  the  dwarves,  and  they  were 
fiercely  angry  because  of  the  death  of  the  Great  Goblin,  and  also  because  of  the 
burning of the chief wolf's nose and the death from the wizard's fire of many of his 
chief  servants. So much  they  told him when he  forced  them, but he guessed  there 
was  more  wickedness  than  this  afoot,  and  that  a  great  raid  of  the  whole  goblin 
army with  their wolf-allies  into  the  lands  shadowed by  the mountains might  soon 
be made  to  find  the  dwarves,  or  to  take  vengeance  on  the men  and  creatures  that 
lived there, and who they thought must be sheltering them. 
"It was  a  good  story,  that of yours," said Beorn, "but I like it still better now I 
am sure it is true. You must forgive my not taking your word. If you lived near the 
edge of Mirkwood, you would  take  the word of no one  that you did not know  as 
well  as  your  brother  or  better. As  it is, I can only say that I have hurried home as 
fast  as  I  could  to  see  that  you  were  safe,  and  to  offer  you  any  help  that  I  can.  I 
shall  think more  kindly  of  dwarves  after  this. Killed  the Great Goblin,  killed  the 
Great Goblin!" he chuckled fiercely to himself. 
"What did you do with the goblin and the Warg?" asked Bilbo suddenly.  
"Come  and  see!"  said  Beorn,  and  they  followed  round  the  house.  A  goblin's 
head was  stuck  outside  the  gate  and  a warg-skin was nailed to a tree just beyond. 
Beorn  was  a  fierce  enemy.  But  now  he  was  their  friend,  and  Gandalf  thought  it 
wise  to  tell  him  their  whole  story  and  the  reason  of  their  journey,  so  that  they 
could get the most help he could offer.  
This is what he promised to do for them. He would provide ponies for each of 
them,  and  a  horse  for Gandalf,  for  their  journey  to  the  forest,  and  he would  lade 
them with food to last them for weeks with care, and packed so as to be as easy as 
possible to carry-nuts, flour, sealed jars of dried fruits, and red earthenware pots of 
honey,  and twice-baked cakes that would keep good a long time, and on a little of 
which they could march far. The making of these was one of his secrets; but honey 
was in them, as in most of his foods, and they were good to eat, though they made 
one  thirsty. Water, he said, they would not need to carry this side of the forest, for 
there were streams and springs along  the road. "But your way  through Mirkwood 
is  dark,  dangerous  and  difficult,"  he  said.  "Water  is  not  easy  to  find  there,  nor 

####-food.  The  time  is  not  yet  come  for  nuts  (though  it may  be  past  and  gone  indeed 
before  you  get  to  the  other  side),  and  nuts  are  about  all  that  grows  there  fit  for 
food;  in  there  the wild  things are dark, queer, and savage. I will provide you with 
skins  for  carrying water,  and  I will give you  some bows  and  arrows. But  I doubt 
very much whether anything you find in Mirkwood will be wholesome to eat or to 
drink. There is one stream there, I know, black and strong which crosses the path. 
That  you  should  neither  drink  of,  nor  bathe  in;  for  I  have  heard  that  it  carries 
enchantment and a great drowsiness and forgetfulness. And in the dim shadows of 
that  place  I  don't  think  you  will  shoot  anything,  wholesome  or  unwholesome, 
without straying from the path. That you MUST NOT do, for any reason. "That is 
all  the  advice  I  can  give  you.  Beyond  the  edge  of  the  forest  I  cannot  help  you 
much;  you must  depend  on  your  luck  and  your  courage  and  the  food  I  send with 
you. At the gate of the forest I must ask you to send back my horse and my ponies. 
But I wish you all speed, and my house is open to you, if ever you come back this 
way again." 
They  thanked  him,  of  course,  with  many  bows  and  sweepings  of  their  hoods 
and with many an "at your service, O master of the wide wooden halls!" But their 
spirits  sank  at  his  grave  words,  and  they  all  felt  that  the  adventure  was  far more 
dangerous  than  they  had  thought,  while  all  the  time,  even  if  they  passed  all  the 
perils of the road, the dragon was waiting at the end. 
All that morning they were busy with preparations. Soon after midday they ate 
with  Beorn  for  the  last  time,  and  after  the  meal  they  mounted  the  steeds  he  was 
lending  them, and bidding him many  farewells  they  rode off  through his gate at a 
good pace. 
As  soon as  they  left his high hedges at  the east of his  fenced lands they turned 
north  and  then  bore  to  the  north-west. By his  advice  they were no  longer making 
for  the main  forest-road to the south of his land. Had they followed the pass, their 
path  would  have  led  them  down  the  stream  from  the  mountains  that  joined  the 
great  river miles  south  of  the Carrock. At  that  point  there was  a  deep  ford which 
they might have passed,  if  they had  still had  their ponies, and beyond  that a  track 
led  to  the  skirts of  the wood and  to  the entrance of  the old  forest  road. But Beorn 
had  warned  them  that  that  way  was  now  often  used  by  the  goblins,  while  the 
forest-road itself, he bad heard, was overgrown and disused at the eastern end and 
led  to  impassable marshes where  the paths had  long been  lost.  Its eastern opening 
had also always been far to the south of the Lonely Mountain, and would have left 
them  still  with  a  long  and  difficult  northward  march  when  they  got  to  the  other 
side. 

####-North  of  the Carrock  the  edge  of Mirkwood  drew  closer  to  the  borders  of  the 
Great River, and though here the Mountains too drew down nearer, Beorn advised 
them to take this way; for at a place a few days' ride due north of the Carrock was 
the  gate  of  a  little-known  pathway  through  Mirkwood  that  led  almost  straight 
towards the Lonely Mountain. 
"The  goblins,"  Beorn  had  said,  "will  not  dare  to  cross  the  Great  River  for  a 
hundred  miles  north  of  the  Carrock  nor  to  come  near  my  house  –  it  is  well 
protected  at  night!–  but  I  should  ride  fast;  for  if  they  make  their  raid  soon  they 
will cross the river to the south  and scour all the edge of the forest so as to cut you 
off,  and  Wargs  run  swifter  than  ponies.  Still  you  are  safer  going  north,  even 
though you seem to be going back nearer to their strongholds; for that is what they 
will  least  expect,  and  they  will  have  the  longer  ride  to  catch  you.  Be  off  now  as 
quick as you may!" 
That  is  why  they  were  now  riding  in  silence,  galloping  wherever  the  ground 
was grassy and  smooth, with  the mountains dark on  their  left, and  in  the distance 
the line of the river with its trees drawing ever closer. The sun had only just turned 
west  when  they  started,  and  till  evening  it  lay  golden  on  the  land  about  them.  It 
was  difficult  to  think  of  pursuing  goblins  behind,  and  when  they  had  put  many 
miles between them and Beorn's house they began to talk and to sing again and to 
forget  the  dark  forest-path  that  lay  in  front.  But  in  the  evening  when  the  dusk 
came on and  the peaks of  the mountains glowered against  the  sunset  they made a 
camp and set a guard, and most of them slept uneasily with dreams in which there 
came  the  howl  of  hunting wolves  and  the  cries  of  goblins.  Still  the  next morning 
dawned bright and fair again. 
There  was  an  autumn-like mist  white  upon  the  ground  and  the  air  was  chill, 
but  soon  the  sun  rose  red  in  the  East  and  the  mists  vanished,  and  while  the 
shadows were still long they were off again. So they rode now for two more days, 
and all  the while  they saw nothing save grass and  flowers and birds and scattered 
trees,  and  occasionally  small  herds  of  red  deer  browsing  or  sitting  at noon  in  the 
shade.  Sometimes  Bilbo  saw  the  horns  of  the  harts  sticking  up  out  of  the  long 
grass,  and  at  first  he  thought  they  were  the  dead  branches  of  trees.  That  third 
evening  they were so eager  to press on,  for Beorn had said  that  they should  reach 
the  forest-gate  early  on  the  fourth  day,  that  they  rode  still  forward  after  dusk  and 
into  the night beneath  the moon. As  the  light faded Bilbo  thought he saw away  to 
the  right,  or  to  the  left,  the  shadowy  form  of  a  great  bear  prowling  along  in  the 
same  direction.  But  if  he  dared  to  mention  it  to  Gandalf,  the  wizard  only  said: 
"Hush! Take no notice!" 

####-Next day they started before dawn, though their night had been short. As soon 
as it was light they could see the forest coming as it were to meet them, or waiting 
for  them  like a black and  frowning wall before  them. The  land began  to  slope up 
and  up,  and  it  seemed  to  the  hobbit  that  a  silence  began  to  draw  in  upon  them. 
Birds  began  to  sing  less.  There  were  no  more  deer;  not  even  rabbits  were  to  be 
seen. By  the  afternoon they had reached the eaves of Mirkwood, and were resting 
almost beneath  the great overhanging boughs of  its outer  trees. Their  trunks were 
huge  and  gnarled,  their  branches  twisted,  their  leaves  were  dark  and  long.  Ivy 
grew on them and trailed along the ground. 
"Well,  here  is  Mirkwood!"  said  Gandalf.  "The  greatest  of  the  forests  of  the 
Northern  world.  I  hope  you  like  the  look  of  it.  Now  you  must  send  back  these 
excellent ponies you have borrowed." 
The  dwarves  were  inclined  to  grumble  at  this,  but  the  wizard  told  them  they 
were  fools. "Beorn  is not as  far off as you seem  to  think, and you had better keep 
your promises  anyway,  for he  is  a bad  enemy. Mr. Baggins'  eyes  are  sharper  than 
yours,  if you have not seen each night after dark a great bear going along with us 
or sitting far of in the moon watching our camps. Not only to guard you and guide 
you, but to keep an eye on the ponies too. Beorn may be your friend, but he loves 
his animals as his children. You do not guess what kindness he has  shown you  in 
letting dwarves ride them so far and so fast, nor what would happen to you, if you 
tried to take them into the forest." 
"What  about  the  horse,  then?"  said  Thorin.  "You  don't  mention  sending  that 
back." 
"I don't, because I am not sending it." 
"What about your promise then?" 
"I will look after that. I am not sending the horse back, I am riding it!" 
Then  they  knew  that  Gandalf  was  going  to  leave  them  at  the  very  edge  of 
Mirkwood, and they were in despair.  
But nothing they could say would change his mind. 
"Now we had this all out before, when we landed on the Carrock," he said. "It 
is no use arguing. I have, as I  told you, some pressing business away south; and I 
am already late through bothering with you people. We may meet again before all 
is  over,  and  then  again of  course we may not. That depends on your  luck  and on 
your courage and  sense; and  I am  sending Mr. Baggins with you.  I have  told you 
before  that  he  has  more  about  him  than  you  guess,  and  you  will  find  that  out 
before  long.  So  cheer  up  Bilbo  and  don't  look  so  glum.  Cheer  up  Thorin  and 

####-Company! This  is  your  expedition  after  all. Think  of  the  treasure  at  the  end,  and 
forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate until tomorrow morning!" 
When tomorrow morning came he still said the same. 
So  now  there  was  nothing  left  to  do  but  to  fill  their  water-skins  at  a  clear 
spring they found close to the forest-gate, and unpack the ponies. They distributed 
the  packages  as  fairly  as  they  could,  though  Bilbo  thought  his  lot  was 
wearisomely heavy, and did not at all like  the idea of trudging for miles and miles 
with all that on his back. 
"Don't you worry!" said Thorin. "It will get  lighter all  too soon. Before  long  I 
expect we shall all wish our packs heavier, when the food begins to run short." 
Then  at  last  they  said  good-bye  to  their  ponies  and  turned  their  heads  for 
home.  Off  they  trotted  gaily,  seeming  very  glad  to  put  their  tails  towards  the 
shadow of Mirkwood. As they went away Bilbo could have sworn that a thing like 
a bear left the shadow of the trees and shambled off quickly after them. 
Now Gandalf  too  said  farewell. Bilbo  sat on  the ground  feeling very unhappy 
and wishing he was beside the wizard on his tall horse. He had gone just inside the 
forest  after  breakfast  (a  very  poor  one),  and  it  had  seemed  as  dark  in  there  in  the 
morning  as  at  night,  and  very  secret:  "a  sort  of watching  and waiting  feeling,"  he 
said to himself. 
"Good-bye!"  said  Gandalf  to  Thorin.  "And  good-bye  to  you  all,  good-bye! 
Straight through the forest is your way now. Don't stray off the track!-if you do, it 
is  a  thousand  to one you will never  find  it  again  and never get out of Mirkwood; 
and then I don't suppose I, or any one else, will ever see you again." 
"Do we really have to go through?" groaned the hobbit. 
"Yes, you do!" said the wizard, "if  you want to get to the other side. You must 
either go through or give up your quest. And I am not going to allow you to back 
out  now,  Mr.  Baggins.  I  am  ashamed  of  you  for  thinking  of  it.  You  have  got  to 
look after all these dwarves for me," he laughed. 
"No! no!" said Bilbo. "I didn't mean that. I meant, is there no way round?" 
"There is, if you care to go two hundred miles or so out of your way north, and 
twice  that  south.  But  you  wouldn't  get  a  safe  path  even  then.  There  are  no  safe 
paths  in  this part of  the world. Remember you are over the Edge of the Wild now, 
and in for all sorts of fun wherever you go. Before you could get round Mirkwood 
in  the  North  you  would  be  right  among  the  slopes  of  the  Grey  Mountains,  and 
they  are  simply  stiff  with  goblins,  hobgoblins,  and  rest  of  the  worst  description. 
Before  you  could  get  round  it  in  the  South,  you  would  get  into  the  land  of  the 
Necromancer;  and  even  you.  Bilbo, won't  need me  to  tell  you  tales  of  that  black 

####-sorcerer. I don't advise you to go anywhere near the places overlooked by his dark 
tower! Stick  to  the  forest-track, keep your spirits up, hope for the best, and with a 
tremendous  slice  of  luck  you  may  come  out  one  day  and  see  the  Long  Marshes 
lying  below  you,  and  beyond  them,  high  in  the East,  the Lonely Mountain where 
dear old Smaug lives, though I hope he is not expecting you." 
"Very  comforting  you  are  to  be  sure,"  growled  Thorin.  "Good-bye!  If  you 
won't come with us, you had better get off without any more talk!" 
"Good-bye  then,  and  really  good-bye!"  said  Gandalf,  and  he  turned  his  horse 
and  rode  down  into  the West.  But  he  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  have  the 
last word. Before he had passed quite out of hearing he turned and put his hands to 
his mouth  and  called  to  them. They  heard  his  voice  come  faintly:  "Good-bye! Be 
good, take care of yourselves-and DON'T LEAVE THE PATH!" 
Then he galloped away and was soon lost to sight. "O good-bye and go away!" 
grunted  the  dwarves,  all  the  more  angry  because  they  were  really  filled  with 
dismay at losing him. Now began the most dangerous part of all the journey.  
They  each  shouldered  the  heavy  pack  and  the  water-skin  which  was  their 
share, and turned from the light that lay on the lands outside and plunged into the 
forest.  
 

####-<h4>Chapter 8 </h4> <br>

Flies and Spiders 

 
They  walked  in  single  file.  The  entrance  to  the  path  was  like  a  sort  of  arch 
leading  into  a  gloomy  tunnel made  by  two  great  trees  that  leant  together,  too  old 
and  strangled  with  ivy  and  hung  with  lichen  to  bear  more  than  a  few  blackened 
leaves. The  path  itself was  narrow and wound in and out among the trunks. Soon 
the  light  at  the  gate  was  like  a  little  bright  hole  far  behind,  and  the  quiet  was  so 
deep that their feet seemed to thump along while all the trees leaned over them and 
listened. As  theft  eyes  became  used  to  the  dimness  they  could  see  a  little way  to 
either  side  in  a  sort  of  darkened  green  glimmer.  Occasionally  a  slender  beam  of 
sun  that had  the  luck  to slip  in  through some opening  in  the  leaves far above, and 
still  more  luck  in  not  being  caught  in  the  tangled  boughs  and  matted  twigs 
beneath,  stabbed  down  thin  and  bright  before  them.  But  this  was  seldom,  and  it 
soon ceased altogether.  
There were  black  squirrels  in  the wood. As  Bilbo's  sharp  inquisitive  eyes  got 
used  to  seeing  things  he  could  catch  glimpses  of  them whisking  off  the  path  and 
scuttling  behind  tree-trunks.  There  were  queer  noises  too,  grunts,  scufflings,  and 
hurryings  in  the undergrowth, and among  the  leaves  that  lay piled endlessly  thick 
in  places  on  the  forest-floor;  but  what  made  the  noises  he  could  not  see.  The 
nastiest  things  they  saw  were  the  cobwebs:  dark  dense  cobwebs  with  threads 
extraordinarily  thick,  often  stretched  from  tree  to  tree,  or  tangled  in  the  lower 
branches  on  either  side  of  them.  There  were  none  stretched  across  the  path,  but 
whether because some magic kept it clear, or for what other reason they could not 
guess. 
It was not long before they grew to hate the forest as heartily as they had hated 
the tunnels of the goblins, and it seemed to offer even less hope of any ending. But 
they had to go on and on, long after they were sick for a sight of the sun and of the 
sky, and  longed for  the feel of wind on  their faces. There was no movement of air 
down under the forest-roof, and it was everlastingly still and dark and stuffy. Even 
the dwarves felt it, who were used to tunnelling, and lived at times for long whiles 
without the light of the sun; but the hobbit, who liked holes to make a house in but 
not to spend summer days in, felt he was being slowly suffocated. 
The nights were the worst. It then became pitch-dark – not what you call pitch-
dark,  but  really  pitch;  so  black  that  you  really  could  see  nothing.  Bilbo  tried 
flapping his hand in front of his nose, but he could not see it at all. Well, perhaps it 

####-is  not  true  to  say  that  they  could  see  nothing:  they  could  see  eyes. They  slept  all 
closely  huddled  together,  and  took  it  in  turns  to  watch;  and  when  it  was  Bilbo's 
turn  he  would  see  gleams  in  the  darkness  round  them,  and  sometimes  pairs  of 
yellow  or  red  or  green  eyes  would  stare  at  him  from  a  little  distance,  and  then 
slowly  fade  and  disappear  and  slowly  shine  out  again  in  another  place.  And 
sometimes  they  would  gleam  down  from  the  branches  just  above  him;  and  that 
was most terrifying. But the eyes that he liked the least were horrible pale bulbous 
sort  of  eyes.  "Insect  eyes"  he  thought,  "not  animal  eyes,  only  they  are  much  too 
big." 
Although  it was  not  yet  very  cold,  they  tried  lighting watch-fires at night, but 
they  soon  gave  that  up.  It  seemed  to  bring  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  eyes  all 
round  them,  though  the  creatures,  whatever  they  were,  were  careful  never  to  let 
their bodies show in the little flicker of the flames. Worse still it brought thousands 
of  dark-grey  and  black  moths,  some  nearly  as  big  as  your  hand,  flapping  and 
whirring  round their ears. They could not stand that, nor the huge bats, black as a 
top-hat,  either;  so  they  gave  up  fires  and  sat  at  night  and  dozed  in  the  enormous 
uncanny darkness. 
All  this  went  on  for  what  seemed  to  the  hobbit  ages  upon  ages;  and  he  was 
always  hungry,  for  they were extremely careful with  their provisions. Even  so, as 
days  followed  days,  and  still  the  forest  seemed  just  the  same,  they  began  to  get 
anxious. The  food would not  last  for  ever:  it was  in  fact  already beginning  to get 
low. They tried shooting at the squirrels, and they wasted many arrows before they 
managed  to  bring  one  down  on  the  path.  But  when  they  roasted  it,  it  proved 
horrible to taste, and they shot no more squirrels. 
They  were  thirsty  too,  for  they  had  none  too  much  water,  and  in  all  the  time 
they  had  seen  neither  spring  nor  stream.  This  was  their  state  when  one  day  they 
found their path blocked by a running water. It flowed fast and strong but not very 
wide right across  the way, and  it was black, or  looked  it  in  the gloom. It was well 
that  Beorn  had  warned  them  against  it,  or  they  would  have  drunk  from  it, 
whatever  its  colour,  and  filled  some  of  their  emptied  skins  at  its  bank. As  it was 
they only thought of how to cross it without wetting themselves in its water. There 
had  been  a  bridge  of  wood  across,  but  it  had  rotted  and  fallen  leaving  only  the 
broken posts near the bank. 
Bilbo kneeling on the brink and peering forward cried: "There is a boat against 
the far bank! Now why couldn't it have been this side!" 
"How far away do you think it is?" asked Thorin, for by now they knew Bilbo 
had the sharpest eyes among them. 

####-"Not at all far. I shouldn't think above twelve yards." 
"Twelve  yards!  I  should  have  thought  it was  thirty  at  least,  but my  eyes  don't 
see  as  well  as  they  used  a  hundred  years  ago.  Still  twelve  yards  is  as  good  as  a 
mile. We can't jump it, and we daren't try to wade or swim." 
"Can any of you throw a rope?" 
"What's the good of that? The boat is sure to be tied up, even if we could hook 
it, which I doubt." 
"I  don't  believe  it  is  tied,"  said Bilbo,  "though of  course  I  can't be  sure  in  this 
light;  but  it  looks  to me  as  if  it was  just  drawn  up  on  the  bank, which  is  low  just 
there where the path goes down into the water." 
"Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the youngest and still  has the best sight," said 
Thorin.  "Come  here  Fili,  and  see  if  you  can  see  the  boat  Mr.  Baggins  is  talking 
about." 
Fili thought he could; so when he had stared a long while to get an idea of the 
direction,  the  others  brought  him  a  rope.  They  had  several with  them, and on  the 
end  of  the  longest  they  fastened  one  of  the  large  iron  hooks  they  had  used  for 
catching  their packs  to  the  straps  about  their  shoulders. Fili  took  this  in his hand, 
balanced it for a moment, and then flung it across the stream. 
Splash  it  fell  in  the  water!  "Not  far  enough!"  said  Bilbo  who  was  peering 
forward.  "A  couple  of  feet  and  you  would  have  dropped  it  on  to  the  boat.  Try 
again.  I don't  suppose  the magic  is  strong  enough  to hurt you,  if you  just  touch  a 
bit of wet rope." 
Fili  picked  up  the  hook when  he  had  drawn  it  back,  rather  doubtfully  all  the 
same. This time he threw it with greater strength. 
"Steady!" said Bilbo, "you have thrown it right into the wood on the other side 
now.  Draw  it  back  gently."  Fili  hauled  the  rope  back  slowly,  and  after  a  while 
Bilbo said: 
"Carefully! It is lying on the boat; let's hope the hook will catch." 
It  did.  The  rope went  taut,  and  Fili  pulled  in  vain. Kili  came  to  his  help,  and 
then  Oin  and  Gloin.  They  tugged  and  tugged,  and  suddenly  they  all  fell  over  on 
their backs. Bilbo was on  the  lockout, however, caught  the rope, and with a piece 
of  stick  fended  off  the  little  black  boat  as  it  came  rushing  across  the  stream. 
"Help!"  he  shouted,  and Balin was  just  in  time  to  seize  the  boat  before  it  floated 
off down the current. 
"It  was  tied  after  all,"  said  he,  looking  at  the  snapped  painter  that  was  still 
dangling  from  it.  "That  was  a  good  pull,  my  lads;  and  a  good  job  that  our  rope 
was the stronger." 

####-"Who'll cross first?" asked Bilbo. 
"I  shall,"  said Thorin,  "and  you will come with me, and Fili and Balin. That's 
as  many  as  the  boat  will  hold  at  a  time.  After  that  Kili  and  Oin  and  Gloin  and 
Don; next On and Nori, Bifur and Bofur; and last Dwalin and Bombur." 
"I'm  always  last  and  I  don't  like  it,"  said  Bombur.  "It's  somebody  else's  turn 
today." 
"You  should  not  be  so  fat. As  you  are,  you must  be with  the  last  and  lightest 
boatload.  Don't  start  grumbling  against  orders,  or  something  bad  will  happen  to 
you." 
"There  aren't  any  oars.  How  are  you  going  to  push  the  boat  back  to  the  far 
bank?" asked the hobbit. 
"Give me  another  length  of  rope  and  another  hook,"  said  Fili,  and when  they 
had got  it  ready, he cast  into  the darkness ahead and as high as he could  throw  it. 
Since  it did not  fall down again,  they saw  that  it must have stuck in the branches. 
"Get  in now," said Fili, "and one of you haul on  the rope  that  is stuck  in a  tree on 
the other  side. One of  the others must keep hold of  the hook we used  at  first,  and 
when we  are  safe  on  the  other  side  he  can  hook  it  on,  and  you  can draw  the boat 
back." 
In  this  way  they  were  all  soon  on  the  far  bank  safe  across  the  enchanted 
stream.  Dwalin  had  just  scrambled  out  with  the  coiled  rope  on  his  arm,  and 
Bombur  (still  grumbling)  was  getting  ready  to  follow,  when  something  bad  did 
happen. There was a  flying  sound of hooves on  the path ahead. Out of  the gloom 
came suddenly  the shape of a  flying deer.  It charged  into  the dwarves and bowled 
them  over,  then  gathered  itself  for  a  leap.  High  it  sprang  and  cleared  the  water 
with  a  mighty  jump.  But  it  did  not  reach  the  other  side  in  safety. Thorin was  the 
only  one  who  had  kept  his  feet  and  his  wits.  As  soon  as  they  had  landed  he  had 
bent his bow and fitted an arrow in case any hidden guardian of the boat appeared. 
Now he  sent  a  swift  and  sure  shot  into the leaping beast. As it reached the further 
bank  it  stumbled.  The  shadows  swallowed  it  up,  but  they  heard  the  sound  of 
hooves quickly falter and then go still. 
Before  they  could  shout  in  praise  of  the  shot,  however,  a  dreadful  wail  from 
Bilbo  put  all  thoughts  of  venison  out  of  their  minds.  "Bombur  has  fallen  in! 
Bombur is drowning!" he cried. It was only too true. Bombur had only one foot on 
the land when the hart bore down on him, and sprang over him. He had stumbled, 
thrusting the boat away from the bank, and then toppled back into the dark water, 
his  hands  slipping  off  the  slimy  roots  at  the  edge,  while  the  boat  span  slowly  off 
and disappeared. 

####-They  could  still  see  his  hood  above  the  water  when  they  ran  to  the  bank. 
Quickly  they  flung  a  rope with  a  hook towards him. His hand caught it, and they 
pulled  him  to  the  shore.  He  was  drenched  from  hair  to  boots,  of  course,  but  that 
was  not  the  worst.  When  they  laid  him  on  the  bank  he  was  already  fast  asleep, 
with one hand clutching the rope so tight that they could not get it from his grasp; 
and  fast asleep he  remained  in  spite of all  they could do. They were  still  standing 
over him,  cursing  their  ill  luck,  and Bombur's  clumsiness,  and  lamenting  the  loss 
of  the  boat  which  made  it  impossible  for  them  to  go  back  and  look  for  the  hart, 
when  they became  aware of  the dim blowing of horns  in  the wood  and  the  sound 
as  of  dogs  baying  far  off.  Then  they  all  fell  silent;  and  as  they  sat  it  seemed  they 
could hear  the noise of a great hunt going by  to  the north of  the path, though they 
saw no sign of it. There they sat for a long while and did not dare to make a move. 
Bombur  slept  on with  a  smile  on  his  fat  face,  as  if  he  no  longer  cared  for  all  the 
troubles that vexed them. 
Suddenly  on  the  path  ahead  appeared  some  white  deer,  a  hind  and  fawns  as 
snowy  white  as  the  hart  had  been  dark.  They  glimmered  in  the  shadows.  Before 
Thorin  could  cry  out  three  of  the  dwarves  had  leaped  to  their  feet  and  loosed  off 
arrows  from  their  bows.  None  seemed  to  find  their  mark.  The  deer  turned  and 
vanished  in  the  trees  as  silently  as  they  had  come,  and  in  vain  the  dwarves  shot 
their arrows after them. 
"Stop!  stop!"  shouted  Thorin;  but  it  was  too  late,  the  excited  dwarves  had 
wasted  their  last  arrows,  and  now  the  bows  that  Beorn  had  given  them  were 
useless. 
They  were  a  gloomy  party  that  night,  and  the  gloom  gathered  still  deeper  on 
them in the following days. They had crossed the enchanted stream; but beyond it 
the  path  seemed  to  straggle  on  just  as  before,  and  in  the  forest  they  could  see  no 
change.  Yet  if  they  had  known  more  about  it  and  considered  the  meaning  of  the 
hunt  and  the  white  deer  that  had  appeared  upon  their  path,  they  would  have 
known  that  they  were  at  last  drawing  towards  the  eastern  edge,  and  would  soon 
have  come,  if  they  could  have  kept  up  their  courage  and  their  hope,  to  thinner 
trees and places where the sunlight came again. 
But  they  did  not  know  this,  and  they  were  burdened  with  the  heavy  body  of 
Bombur,  which  they  had  to  carry  along  with  them  as  best  they  could,  taking  the 
wearisome  task  in  turns  of  four  each while  the  others  shared  their  packs.  If  these 
had not become all too light in the last few days, they would never have managed 
it;  but  a  slumbering  and  smiling  Bombur  was  a  poor  exchange  for  packs  filled 
with  food  however  heavy.  In  a  few  days  a  time  came when  there was  practically 

####-nothing  left  to  eat  or  to  drink. Nothing wholesome  could  they  see  growing  in  the 
woods, only funguses and herbs with pale leaves and unpleasant smell. 
About four days from the enchanted stream they  came to a part where most of 
the trees were beeches. They were at first inclined to be cheered by the change, for 
here  there  was  no  undergrowth  and  the  shadow  was  not  so  deep.  There  was  a 
greenish light about them, and in places they could see some distance to either side 
of  the  path.  Yet  the  light  only  showed  them  endless  lines  of  straight  grey  trunks 
like the pillars of some huge twilight hall. There was a breath of air and a noise of 
wind,  but  it  had  a  sad  sound.  A  few  leaves  came  rustling  down  to  remind  them 
that  outside  autumn was  coming  on.  Their  feet  ruffled  among  the  dead  leaves  of 
countless other  autumns  that drifted over  the banks of  the path  from  the deep  red 
carpets of the forest. 
Still Bombur  slept  and  they grew very weary. At  times  they heard disquieting 
laughter.  Sometimes  there  was  singing  in  the  distance  too.  The  laughter  was  the 
laughter of fair voices not of goblins, and the singing was beautiful, but it sounded 
eerie and  strange, and  they were not comforted,  rather  they hurried on  from  those 
parts with what strength they had left. 
Two  days  later  they  found  their  path  going  downwards  and  before  long  they 
were in a valley filled almost entirely with a mighty growth of oaks. 
"Is there no end to this accursed forest?" said Thorin. 
"Somebody must climb a tree and see if he can get his head above the roof and 
have  a  look  round.  The  only  way  is  to  choose  the  tallest  tree  that  overhangs  the 
path." 
Of course "somebody" meant Bilbo. They chose him because  to be of any use 
the  climber  must  get  his  head  above  the  topmost  leaves,  and  so  he must  be  light 
enough for the highest and slenderest branches to bear him. Poor Mr. Baggins had 
never had much practice in climbing trees, but they hoisted him up into the lowest 
branches of an enormous oak that grew right out into the path, and up he had to go 
as best he could. He pushed his way through the tangled twigs with many a slap in 
the eye; he was greened and grimed from the old bark of the greater boughs; more 
than  once  he  slipped  and  caught  himself  just  in  time; and at  last, after a dreadful 
struggle  in  a  difficult  place  where  there  seemed  to  be  no  convenient  branches  at 
all, he got near the top. All the time he was wondering whether there were spiders 
in the tree, and how he was going to get down again (except by falling). 
In  the  end  he  poked  his  head  above  the  roof  of  leaves,  and  then  he  found 
spiders  all  right.  But  they  were  only  small  ones  of  ordinary  size,  and  they  were 
after  the  butterflies.  Bilbo's  eyes  were  nearly  blinded  by  the  light.  He  could  hear 

####-the dwarves shouting up at him from far below, but he could not answer, only hold 
on  and  blink.  The  sun  was  shining  brilliantly,  and  it  was  a  long  while  before  he 
could  bear  it. When  he  could,  he  saw  all  round  him  a  sea  of  dark  green,  ruffled 
here  and  there  by the breeze; and there were everywhere hundreds of butterflies. I 
expect  they were a kind of  'purple emperor,' a butterfly  that  loves  the  tops of oak-
woods,  but  these  were  not  purple  at  all,  they  were  a  dark  dark  velvety  black 
without any markings to be seen. 
He  looked  at  the  'black  emperors'  for  a  long  time,  and  enjoyed  the  feel  of  the 
breeze in his hair and on his face; but at length the cries of the dwarves, who were 
now  simply  stamping  with  impatience  down  below,  reminded  him  of  his  real 
business.  It  was  no  good.  Gaze  as much  as  he might,  he  could  see  no  end  to  the 
trees  and  the  leaves  in  any  direction.  His  heart,  that  had  been  lightened  by  the 
sight of the sun and the feel of the wind, sank back into his toes: there was no food 
to go back to down below.  
Actually, as I have told you, they were not far off the edge of the forest; and if 
Bilbo had had the sense to see it, the tree that he had climbed, though it was tall in 
itself, was standing near  the bottom of a wide valley, so  that  from  its  top  the  trees 
seemed  to  swell  up  all  round  like  the  edges  of  a  great  bowl,  and  he  could  not 
expect  to  see  how  far  the  forest  lasted.  Still  he  did  not  see  this,  and  he  climbed 
down  full  of  despair.  He  got  to  the  bottom  again  at  last  scratched,  hot,  and 
miserable,  and  he  could  not  see  anything  in  the  gloom  below  when  he  got  there. 
His report soon made the others as miserable as he was. 
"The forest goes on for ever and ever and ever in all directions! Whatever shall 
we do? And what  is  the use of sending a hobbit!"  they cried, as if it was his fault. 
They did not care tuppence about the butterflies, and were only made more angry 
when he told them of the beautiful breeze, which they were too heavy to climb up 
and feel. 
 
That  night  they  ate  their  very  last  scraps  and  crumbs  of  food;  and  next 
morning  when  they  woke  the  first  thing  they  noticed  was  that  they  were  still 
gnawingly  hungry,  and  the  next  thing  was  that  it  was  raining  and  that  here  and 
there  the  drip  of  it  was  dropping  heavily  on  the  forest  floor.  That  only  reminded 
them  that  they  were  also  parchingly  thirsty,  without  doing  anything  to  relieve 
them: you cannot quench a terrible thirst by standing under giant oaks and waiting 
for  a  chance  drip  to  fall  on  your  tongue.  The  only  scrap  of  comfort  there  was, 
came unexpectedly from Bombur.  

####-He woke  up  suddenly  and  sat  up  scratching  his  head. He  could  not make  out 
where  he  was  at  all,  nor  why  he  felt  so  hungry;  for  he  had  forgotten  everything 
that  had  happened  since  they  started  their  journey  that  May  morning  long  ago. 
The  last  thing  that  he  remembered  was  the  party  at  the  hobbit's  house,  and  they 
had  great  difficulty  in  making  him  believe  their  tale  of  all  the  many  adventures 
they had had since. 
When he heard that there was nothing to eat, he sat down and wept, for he felt 
very  weak  and  wobbly  in  the  legs.  "Why  ever  did  I  wake  up!"  he  cried.  "I  was 
having such beautiful dreams. I dreamed I was walking in a forest rather like this 
one,  only  lit with  torches  on  the  trees  and  lamps  swinging  from  the  branches  and 
fires  burning  on  the  ground;  and  there  was  a  great  feast  going  on,  going  on  for 
ever.  A  woodland  king  was  there  with  a  crown  of  leaves,  and  there  was  a merry 
singing, and I could not count or describe the things there were to eat and drink." 
"You need not try," said Thorin. "In fact if you can't talk about something else, 
you  had  better  be  silent.  We  are  quite  annoyed  enough  with  you  as  it  is.  If  you 
hadn't waked up, we should have left you to your idiotic dreams in the forest; you 
are no joke to carry even after weeks of short commons." 
There  was  nothing  now  to  be  done  but  to  tighten  the  belts  round  their  empty 
stomachs,  and  hoist  their  empty  sacks  and  packs,  and  trudge  along  the  track 
without any great hope of ever getting to the end before they lay down and died of 
starvation.  This  they  did  all  that  day,  going  very  slowly  and  wearily,  while 
Bombur  kept  on wailing  that  his  legs would  not  carry  him  and  that  he wanted  to 
lie down and sleep. 
"No you don't!" they said. "Let your legs take their share, we have carried you 
far enough." 
All  the same he suddenly refused  to go a step further and flung himself on  the 
ground.  "Go  on,  if  you  must,"  he  said.  "I'm  just  going  to  lie  here  and  sleep  and 
dream of food, if I can't get it any other way. I hope I never wake up again." 
At that very moment Balin, who was a little way ahead, called out: "What was 
that? I thought I saw a twinkle of light in the forest." 
They  all  looked,  and  a  longish  way  off,  it  seemed,  they  saw  a  red  twinkle  in 
the dark; then another and another sprang out beside it. Even Bombur got up, and 
they hurried along then, not caring if it was trolls or goblins. The light was in front 
of them and to the left of the path, and when at last they had drawn level with it, it 
seemed  plain  that  torches  and  fires were  burning  under  the  trees, but a good way 
off their track. 

####-"It  looks  as  if  my  dreams  were  coming  true,"  gasped  Bombur  puffing  up 
behind. He wanted to rush straight off into the wood after the lights. But the others 
remembered  only  too  well  the  warnings  of  the  wizard  and  of  Beorn.  "A  feast 
would be no good, if we never got back alive from it," said Thorin. 
"But  without  a  feast  we  shan't  remain  alive  much  longer  anyway,"  said 
Bombur, and Bilbo heartily agreed with him. They argued about it backwards and 
forwards for a long while, until they agreed at length to send out a couple of spies, 
to  creep  near  the  lights  and  find  out  more  about  them.  But  then  they  could  not 
agree  on  who  was  to  be  sent:  no  one  seemed  anxious  to  run  the  chance  of  being 
lost  and  never  finding  his  friends  again.  In  the  end,  in  spite  of  warnings,  hunger 
decided  them,  because  Bombur  kept  on  describing  all  the  good  things  that  were 
being eaten, according to his dream, in the woodland feast; so they all left the path 
and plunged into the forest together.  
After  a  good  deal  of  creeping  and  crawling  they  peered  round  the  trunks  and 
looked  into  a  clearing where  some  trees  had  been  felled  and  the  ground  levelled. 
There were many people there, elvish-looking folk, all dressed in green and brown 
and  sitting  on  sawn  rings  of  the  felled  trees  in  a  great  circle.  There was  a  fire  in 
their midst  and  there were  torches  fastened  to  some  of  the  trees  round  about;  but 
most splendid sight of all: they were eating and drinking and laughing merrily.  
The smell of the roast meats was so enchanting that, without waiting to consult 
one  another,  every  one  of  them  got  up  and  scrambled  forwards  into  the  ring with 
the  one  idea  of  begging  for  some  food.  No  sooner  had  the  first  stepped  into  the 
clearing  than all  the  lights went out as  if by magic. Somebody kicked the fire and 
it  went  up  in  rockets  of  glittering  sparks  and  vanished.  They  were  lost  in  a 
completely  lightless dark and  they could not even find one another, not for a  long 
time  at  any  rate.  After  blundering  frantically  in  the  gloom,  falling  over  logs, 
bumping  crash  into  trees,  and  shouting  and  calling  till  they  must  have  waked 
everything  in  the  forest  for miles,  at  last  they managed  to  gather  themselves  in  a 
bundle  and  count  themselves  by  touch.  By  that  time  they  had,  of  course,  quite 
forgotten  in what direction  the path  lay,  and  they were  all hopelessly  lost,  at  least 
till morning. 
There was nothing for it but to settle down for the night where they were; they 
did not  even dare  to  search on  the ground  for  scraps of  food  for  fear of becoming 
separated again. But they had not been lying long, and Bilbo was only just getting 
drowsy, when Dori, whose turn it was to watch first, said in a loud whisper: 
"The  lights  are  coming  out  again  over  there,  and  there  are more  than  ever  of 
them." 

####-Up they all jumped. There, sure enough, not far away were scores of twinkling 
lights, and  they heard  the voices and  the  laughter quite plainly. They crept slowly 
towards  them,  in  a  single  line,  each  touching  the  back  of  the  one  in  front. When 
they  got  near Thorin  said:  "No  rushing  forward  this  time! No  one  is  to  stir  from 
hiding till I say. I shall send Mr. Baggins alone first to talk to them. They won't be 
frightened  of  him-('What  about me  of  them?'  thought  Bilbo)-and any way  I hope 
they won't do anything nasty to him." 
When  they  got  to  the  edge  of  the  circle  of  lights  they  pushed  Bilbo  suddenly 
from behind. Before he had  time  to  slip on his  ring, he  stumbled  forward  into  the 
full blaze of the fire and torches. It was no good. Out went all the lights again and 
complete darkness fell. If  it had been difficult collecting  themselves before,  it was 
far  worse  this  time.  And  they  simply  could  not  find  the  hobbit.  Every  time  they 
counted  themselves  it  only  made  thirteen.  They  shouted  and  called:  "Bilbo 
Baggins!  Hobbit!  You  dratted  hobbit!  Hi!  hobbit,  confusticate  you,  where  are 
you?" and other things of that sort, but there was no answer.  
They were just giving up hope, when Dori stumbled across him by sheer luck. 
In the dark he fell over what he thought was a log, and he found it was the hobbit 
curled  up  fast  asleep.  It  took  a  deal  of  shaking  to  wake  him,  and  when  he  was 
awake he was not pleased at all. 
"I  was  having  such  a  lovely  dream,"  he  grumbled,  "all  about  having  a  most 
gorgeous dinner." 
"Good  heavens!  he  has  gone  like  Bombur,"  they  said.  "Don't  tell  us  about 
dreams. Dream-dinners aren't any good, and we can't share them." 
"They  are  the best  I  am  likely  to get  in  this beastly place," he muttered,  as he 
lay  down  beside  the  dwarves  and  tried  to  go  back  to  sleep  and  find  his  dream 
again.  But  that  was  not  the  last  of  the  lights  in  the  forest.  Later  when  the  night 
must  have  been  getting  old,  Kili  who  was  watching  then,  came  and  roused  them 
all again, saying: 
"There's a regular blaze of light begun not far away – hundreds of torches and 
many fires must have been lit suddenly and by magic. And hark to the singing and 
the harps!" 
After lying and listening for a while, they found they could not resist the desire 
to  go  nearer  and  try  once  more  to  get  help.  Up  they  got  again;  and  this  time  the 
result  was  disastrous.  The  feast  that  they  now  saw  was  greater  and  more 
magnificent  than before;  and  at  the head of  a  long  line of  feasters  sat  a woodland 
king  with  a  crown  of  leaves  upon  his  golden  hair,  very  much  as  Bombur  had 
described the figure in his dream. The elvish folk were passing bowls from hand to 

####-hand  and  across  the  fires,  and  some  were  harping  and many  were  singing.  Their 
gloaming  hair  was  twined  with  flowers;  green  and  white  gems  glinted  on  their 
collars and their belts; and their faces and their songs were filled with mirth. Loud 
and clear and fair were those songs, and out stepped Thorin into their midst. 
Dead  silence  fell  in  the middle of  a word. Out went  all  light. The  fires  leaped 
up  in  black  smokes.  Ashes  and  cinders  were  in  the  eyes  of  the  dwarves,  and  the 
wood  was  filled  again  with  their  clamour  and  their  cries.  Bilbo  found  himself 
running round and round (as he thought) and calling and calling: "Dori, Nori, Ori, 
Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur, Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin Oakenshield," 
while people he could not see or  feel were doing  the same all  round him  (with an 
occasional "Bilbo!" thrown in). But the cries of the others got steadily further and 
fainter,  and  though  after  a while  it  seemed  to  him  they  changed  to  yells and cries 
for help  in  the  far distance, all noise at  last died  right away, and he was  left alone 
in complete silence and darkness. 
 
That was  one  of  his most miserable moments. But  he  soon made  up  his mind 
that  it was no good  trying  to do  anything  till  day came with some  little  light, and 
quite  useless  to  go  blundering  about  tiring  himself  out  with  no  hope  of  any 
breakfast to revive him. So he sat himself down with his back to a tree, and not for 
the  last  time  fell  to  thinking  of  his  far-distant  hobbit-hole  with  its  beautiful 
pantries. He was deep in thoughts of bacon and eggs and toast and butter when he 
felt something touch him. Something like a strong sticky string was against his left 
hand,  and when  he  tried  to move  he  found  that  his  legs were  already wrapped  in 
the same stuff, so that when he got up he fell over.  
Then  the great  spider, who had been busy  tying him up while he dozed, came 
from  behind  him  and  came  at  him.  He  could  only  see  the  things's  eyes,  but  he 
could  feel  its  hairy  legs  as  it  struggled  to wind  its  abominable  threads  round  and 
round him. It was lucky that he had come to his senses in time. Soon he would not 
have  been  able  to  move  at  all.  As  it  was,  he  had  a  desperate  fight  before  he  got 
free.  He  beat  the  creature  off  with  his  hands-it  was  trying  to  poison  him  to  keep 
him  quiet,  as  small  spiders  do  to  flies-until he  remembered his  sword  and drew  it 
out. Then the spider jumped back, and he had time to cut his legs loose. After that 
it was  his  turn  to  attack.  The  spider  evidently was  not  used  to  things  that carried 
such stings at  their sides, or  it would have hurried away quicker. Bilbo came at  it 
before  it  could  disappear  and  struck  it  with  his  sword  right  in  the  eyes.  Then  it 
went mad  and  leaped  and  danced  and  flung  out  its  legs  in  horrible  jerks, until he 

####-killed it with another stroke; and then he fell down and remembered nothing more 
for a long while. 
There was  the usual dim grey  light of  the  forest-day about him when he came 
to  his  senses.  The  spider  lay  dead  beside  him,  and  his  sword-blade  was  stained 
black.  Somehow  the  killing  of  the  giant  spider,  all  alone  by  himself  in  the  dark 
without  the  help  of  the  wizard  or  the  dwarves  or  of  anyone  else,  made  a  great 
difference  to Mr. Baggins. He  felt a different person, and much  fiercer and bolder 
in  spite  of  an  empty  stomach,  as  he wiped  his  sword  on  the  grass  and  put  it  back 
into its sheath. 
"I will give you a name," he said to it, "and I shall call you Sting." 
After  that he  set out  to  explore. The  forest was grim  and  silent, but obviously 
he  had  first  of  all  to  look  for  his  friends,  who  were  not  likely  to  be  very  far  off, 
unless they had been made prisoners by the elves (or worse things). 
Bilbo  felt  that  it was unsafe  to  shout,  and he  stood  a  long while wondering  in 
what direction the path lay,  and in what direction he should go first to look for the 
dwarves.  "O!  why  did  we  not  remember  Beorn's  advice,  and  Gandalf's!"  he 
lamented.  "What  a mess we  are  in  now! We!  I  only wish  it was we:  it  is  horrible 
being all alone." 
In the end he made as good a guess as he could at the direction from which the 
cries for help had come in the night – and by luck (he was born with a good share 
of  it) be guessed more or  less  right, as you will  see. Having made up his mind he 
crept  along  as  cleverly  as  he  could.  Hobbits  are  clever  at quietness,  especially  in 
woods,  as  1.  have  already  told  you;  also  Bilbo  had  slipped  on  his  ring  before  he 
started. That is why the spiders neither saw nor heard him coming. 
He had picked his way stealthily 'for some distance, when he noticed a place of 
dense  black  shadow  ahead  of  him  black  even  for  that  forest,  like  a  patch  of 
midnight  that had never been cleared away. As he drew nearer, he saw  that  it was 
made  by  spider-webs one behind  and over  and  tangled with  another. Suddenly he 
saw,  too,  that  there  were  spiders  huge  and  horrible  sitting  in  the  branches  above 
him,  and  ring  or  no  ring  he  trembled  with  fear  lest  they  should  discover  him. 
Standing behind a tree he watched a group of them for some time, and then in the 
silence  and  stillness  of  the  wood  he  realised  that  these  loathsome  creatures  were 
speaking one to another. Their voices were a sort of thin creaking and hissing, but 
he could make out many of  the words  that  they said. They were  talking about  the 
dwarves! 
"It was  a  sharp  struggle, but worth  it,"  said one.  "What nasty  thick  skins  they 
have to be sure, but I'll wager there is good juice inside." 

####-"Aye, they'll make fine eating, when they've hung a bit," said another.  
"Don't  hang  'em  too  long,"  said  a  third.  "They're  not  as  fat  as  they might  be. 
Been feeding none too well of late, I should guess." 
"Kill'em, I say," hissed a fourth; "kill 'em now and hang 'em dead for a while." 
"They're dead now, I'll warrant," said the first. 
"That they are not. I saw one a-struggling just now. Just coming round again, I 
should say, after a bee-autiful sleep. I'll show you." 
With that one of the fat spiders ran along a rope, till it came to a dozen bundles 
hanging  in  a  row  from  a  high  branch.  Bilbo  was  horrified,  now  that  he  noticed 
them for the first time dangling in the shadows, to see a dwarvish foot sticking out 
of  the bottoms of some of  the bundles, or here and  there  the  tip of a nose, or a bit 
of beard or of a hood. 
To the fattest of these bundles the spider went--"It is poor old Bombur, I'll bet," 
thought Bilbo  –  and  nipped  hard  at  the  nose  that  stuck  out. There was  a muffled 
yelp  inside,  and  a  toe  shot  up  and  kicked  the  spider  straight  and  hard. There was 
life  in  Bombur  still.  There  was  a  noise  like  the  kicking  of  a  flabby  football,  and 
the  enraged spider  fell off  the branch, only catching  itself with  its own  thread  just 
in time. 
The  others  laughed.  "You  were  quite  right,"  they  said,  "the  meat's  alive  and 
kicking!"                        " 
"I'll  soon  put  an  end  to  that,"  hissed  the  angry  spider  climbing  back  onto  the 
branch. 
Bilbo  saw  that  the moment  had  come  when  he must  do  something.  He  could 
not  get  up  at  the  brutes  and  he  had  nothing  to  shoot  with;  but  looking  about  he 
saw  that  in  this place  there were many  stones  lying  in what appeared  to be  a now 
dry little watercourse. Bilbo was a pretty fair shot with a stone, and it did not take 
him long to find a nice smooth egg-shaped one that fitted his hand cosily.  
As  a  boy  he  used  to  practise  throwing  stones  at  things,  until  rabbits  and 
squirrels,  and even birds, got out of his way as quick as  lightning  if  they saw him 
stoop;  and  even  grownup  he  had  still  spent  a  deal  of  his  time  at  quoits,  dart-
throwing,  shooting  at  the  wand,  bowls,  ninepins  and  other  quiet  games  of  the 
aiming  and  throwing  sort-indeed  he  could  do  lots  of  things,  besides  blowing 
smoke-rings, asking riddles and cooking, that I haven't had time to tell you about. 
There  is  no  time  now.  While  he  was  picking  up  stones,  the  spider  had  reached 
Bombur,  and  soon  he  would  have  been  dead.  At  that  moment  Bilbo  threw.  The 
stone struck the spider plunk on the head, and it dropped senseless off the tree, flop 
to the ground, with all its legs curled up. 

####-The  next  stone  went  whizzing  through  a  big  web,  snapping  its  cords,  and 
taking off the spider sitting in the middle of it, whack, dead. After that there was a 
deal  of  commotion  in  the  spider-colony,  and  they  forgot  the  dwarves  for  a  bit,  I 
can  tell  you.  They  could  not  see Bilbo,  but  they  could make  a  good  guess  at  the 
direction  from  which  the  stones  were  coming.  As  quick  as  lightning  they  came 
running  and  swinging  towards  the  hobbit,  flinging  out  their  long  threads  in  all 
directions,  till  the  air  seemed  full  of waving  snares. Bilbo,  however,  soon  slipped 
away to a different place. The idea came to him to lead the furious spiders further 
and further away from the dwarves, if he could; to make them curious, excited and 
angry  all  at  once. When  about  fifty  had  gone  off  to  the  place where  he  had  stood 
before, he threw some more stones at these, and at others that had stopped behind; 
then dancing among  the  trees he began  to  sing a  song  to  infuriate  them and bring 
them all after him, and also to let the dwarves hear his voice. 
This is what he sang: 
 

Old fat spider spinning in a tree! 
Old fat spider can't see me! 
Attercop! Attercop! 
Won't you stop, 
Stop your spinning and look for me! 
 
Old Tomnoddy, all big body,  
Old Tomnoddy can't spy me! 
Attercop! Attercop! 
Down you drop! 
You'll never catch me up your tree! 

 
Not very good perhaps, but then you must remember that he had to make it up 
himself, on  the  spur of  a very  awkward moment.  It did what he wanted  any way. 
As he  sang he  threw  some more  stones  and  stamped. Practically  all  the  spiders  in 
the  place  came  after  him:  some  dropped  to  the  ground,  others  raced  along  the 
branches, swung  from  tree  to  tree, or cast new  ropes across  the dark spaces. They 
made  for his noise  far quicker  than he had expected. They were  frightfully angry. 
Quite  apart  from  the  stones  no  spider  has  ever  liked  being  called  Attercop,  and 
Tomnoddy of course is insulting to anybody.  
Off  Bilbo  scuttled  to  a  fresh  place,  but  several  of  the  spiders  had  run  now  to 
different points in the glade where they lived, and were busy spinning webs across 
all  the  spaces  between  the  tree-stems.  Very  soon  the  hobbit would be  caught  in  a 

####-thick fence of them all round him-that at least was the spiders' idea. Standing now 
in  the  middle  of  the  hunting  and  spinning  insects  Bilbo  plucked  up  his  courage 
and began a new song: 
 

####-Lazy Lob and crazy Cob 
are weaving webs to wind me. 
I am far more sweet than other meat, 
but still they cannot find me! 
 
Here am I, naughty little fly; 
you are fat and lazy.  
You cannot trap me, though you try, 
in your cobwebs crazy.  

 
With  that  he  turned  and  found  that  the  last  space  between  two  tall  trees  had 
been closed with a web-but luckily not a proper web, only great strands of double-
thick  spider-rope  run  hastily  backwards  and  forwards  from  trunk  to  trunk.  Out 
came his little' sword. He slashed the threads to pieces and went off singing. 
The spiders saw the sword, though I don't suppose they knew what it was, and 
at once the whole lot of them came hurrying after the hobbit along the ground and 
the branches, hairy legs waving, nippers and spinners snapping, eyes popping, full 
of froth and rage. They followed him into the forest until Bilbo had gone as far as 
he dared. 
Then quieter than a mouse he stole back. He had precious little time, he knew, 
before  the  spiders were disgusted and came back  to  their  trees where  the dwarves 
were hung. In the meanwhile he had to rescue them. The worst part of the job was 
getting up on to the long branch where the bundles were dangling. I don't suppose 
he would  have managed  it,  if  a  spider  had  not  luckily  left  a  rope  hanging  down; 
with  its  help,  though  it  stuck  to  his  hand  and  hurt  him,  he  scrambled  up-only  to 
meet  an old  slow wicked  fat-bodied spider who had remained behind to guard the 
prisoners, and had been busy pinching them to see which was the juiciest to eat. It 
had  thought of starting  the feast while  the others were away, but Mr. Baggins was 
in  a  hurry,  and  before  the  spider  knew  what  was  happening  it  felt  his  sting  and 
rolled off  the branch dead. Bilbo's next  job was  to  loose  a dwarf. What was he  to 
do?  If  he  cut  the  string  which  hung  him  up,  the  wretched  dwarf  would  tumble 
thump to the ground a good way below. Wriggling along the branch (which made 
all the poor dwarves dance and dangle like ripe fruit) he reached the first bundle. 
"Fili  or  Kili,"  he  thought  by  the  tip  of  a  blue  hood  sticking  out  at  the  top. 
"Most  likely Fili," he  thought by  the  tip of a  long nose poking out of  the winding 
threads. He managed by  leaning over  to cut most of  the strong sticky  threads  that 
bound  him  round,  and  then,  sure  enough, with  a  kick  and  a  struggle most  of  Fili 
emerged.  I  am  afraid  Bilbo  actually  laughed  at  the  sight  of  him  jerking  his  stiff 

####-arms and  legs as he danced on  the  spider-string under his armpits, just like one of 
those funny toys bobbing on a wire. 
Somehow  or  other  Fili  was  got  on  to  the  branch,  and  then  he  did  his  best  to 
help  the hobbit,  although he was  feeling very  sick  and  ill  from  spider-poison, and 
from  hanging  most  of  the  night  and  the  next  day  wound  round  and  round  with 
only his nose to breathe through. It took him ages to get the beastly stuff out of his 
eyes and eyebrows, and as for his beard, he had to cut most of it off. Well, between 
them  they started  to haul up  first one dwarf and  then another and slash  them  free. 
None  of  them were  better  off  than  Fili,  and  some  of  them were worse.  Some  had 
hardly  been  able  to breathe  at  all  (long noses  are  sometimes useful you  see),  and 
some had been more poisoned. 
In  this  way  they  rescued  Kili,  Bifur,  Bofur,  Don  and  Nori.  Poor  old  Bombur 
was  so  exhausted-he was  the  fattest  and  had  been  constantly  pinched  and  poked-
that  he  just  rolled off  the branch  and  fell plop on  to  the ground,  fortunately on  to 
leaves,  and  lay  there.  But  there were  still  five  dwarves  hanging  at  the  end  of  the 
branch  when  the  spiders  began  to  come  back,  more  full  of  rage  than  ever.  Bilbo 
immediately  went  to  the  end  of  the  branch  nearest  the  tree-trunk  and  kept  back 
those that crawled up. He had taken off his ring when he rescued Fili and forgotten 
to put it on again, so now they all began to splutter and hiss: 
"Now  we  see  you,  you  nasty  little  creature!  We  will  eat  you  and  leave  your 
bones and skin hanging on a tree. Ugh! he's got a sting has he? Well, we'll get him 
all the same, and then we'll hang him head downwards for a day or two." 
While  this  was  going  on,  the  other  dwarves  were  working  at  the  rest  of  the 
captives,  and  cutting  at  the  threads  with  their  knives.  Soon  all  would  be  free, 
though  it  was  not  clear  what  would  happen  after  that.  The  spiders  had  caught 
them  pretty  easily  the  night  before,  but  that  had  been  unawares  and  in  the  dark. 
This time there looked like being a horrible battle. 
Suddenly  Bilbo  noticed  that  some  of  the  spiders  had  gathered  round  old 
Bombur on the floor, and had tied him up again and were dragging him away. He 
gave  a  shout  and  slashed  at  the  spiders  in  front  of  him.  They  quickly  gave way, 
and  he  scrambled  and  fell  down  the  tree  right  into  the  middle  of  those  on  the 
ground. His  little sword was something new  in  the way of stings for  them. How  it 
darted  to  and  fro!  It  shone with  delight  as  he  stabbed  at  them. Half  a  dozen were 
killed before the rest drew off and left Bombur to Bilbo. 
"Come  down! Come  down!"  he  shouted  to  the  dwarves  on  the  branch.  "Don't 
stay up  there and be netted!" For he saw spiders swarming up all  the neighboring 
trees, and crawling along the boughs above the heads of the dwarves. 

####-Down the dwarves scrambled or jumped or dropped, eleven all in a heap, most 
of  them  very  shaky  and  little  use  on  their  legs. There  they were  at  last,  twelve  of 
them counting poor old Bombur, who was being propped up on either  side by his 
cousin Bifur, and his brother Bofur; and Bilbo was dancing about and waving his 
Sting;  and  hundreds  of  angry  spiders were  goggling  at  them  all  round  and  about 
and above. It looked pretty hopeless. 
Then  the  battle  began. Some  of  the  dwarves  had  knives,  and some had sticks, 
and  all  of  them  could  get  at  stones;  and  Bilbo  had  his  elvish  dagger.  Again  and 
again  the spiders were beaten off, and many of  them were killed. But  it could not 
go  on  for  long. Bilbo was  nearly  tired  out;  only  four  of  the  dwarves were  able to 
stand firmly, and soon they would all be overpowered like weary flies. Already the 
spiders were beginning to weave their webs all round them again from tree to tree. 
In the end Bilbo could think of no plan except to let the dwarves into the secret of 
his ring. He was rather sorry about it, but it could not be helped. 
"I  am  going  to  disappear,"  he  said.  "I  shall  draw  the  spiders  off,  if  I  can;  and 
you must keep  together  and make  in  the opposite direction. To  the  left  there,  that 
is more or less the way towards the place where we last saw the elf-fires." 
It was difficult to get them to understand, what with their dizzy heads, and the 
shouts, and the whacking of sticks and the throwing of stones; but at last Bilbo felt 
he  could  delay  no  longer-the  spiders  were  drawing  their  circle  ever  closer.  He 
suddenly  slipped  on  his  ring,  and  to  the  great  astonishment  of  the  dwarves  he 
vanished. 
Soon  there  came  the  sound  of  "Lazy  Lob"  and  "Attercop"  from  among  the 
trees  away  on  the  right.  That  upset  the  spiders  greatly. They  stopped  advancing, 
and  some,  went  off  in  the  direction  of  the  voice.  "Attercop" made  them  so  angry 
that  they  lost  their wits. Then Balin, who had grasped Bilbo's plan better  than  the 
rest, led an attack. The dwarves huddled together in a knot, and sending a shower 
of  stones  they  drove  at  the  spiders  on  the  left,  and  burst  through  the  ring.  Away 
behind them now the shouting and singing suddenly stopped. 
Hoping  desperately  that Bilbo  had  not  been  caught  the  dwarves went  on. Not 
fast enough, though. They were sick and weary, and they could not go much better 
than a hobble and a wobble, though many of the spiders were close behind. Every 
now  and  then  they  had  to  turn  and  fight  the  creatures  that were  overtaking  them 
and  already  some  spiders  were  in  the  trees  above  them  and  throwing  down  their 
long clinging threads. 
Things  were  looking  pretty  bad  again,  when  suddenly  Bilbo  appeared  and 
charged into the astonished spiders unexpectedly from the side. 

####-"Go  on!  Go  on!"  he  shouted.  "I  will  do  the  stinging!"  And  he did. He darted 
backwards  and  forwards,  slashing  at  spider-threads,  hacking  at  their  legs,  and 
stabbing  at  their  fat  bodies  if  they  came  too  near.  The  spiders  swelled  with  rage, 
and  spluttered  and  frothed,  and  hissed  out  horrible  curses;  but  they  had  become 
mortally afraid of Sting, and dared not come very near, now that it had come back. 
So curse as  they would,  their prey moved slowly but steadily away. It was a most 
terrible business, and seemed to take hours. But at last, just when Bilbo felt that he 
could  not  lift  his  hand  for  a  single  stroke  more,  the  spiders  suddenly  gave  it  up, 
and followed them no more, but went back disappointed to their dark colony.  
The  dwarves  then  noticed  that  they  had  come  to  the  edge  of  a  ring where  elf-
fires  had  been.  Whether  it  was  one  of  those  they  had  seen  the  night  before,  they 
could  not  tell. But  it  seemed  that  some  good magic  lingered  in  such  spots, which 
the spiders did not like. At any rate here the light was greener, and the boughs less 
thick and threatening, and they had a chance to rest and draw breath. 
There they lay for some time, puffing and panting. put very soon they began to 
ask questions. They had to have the whole vanishing business carefully explained, 
and  the  finding  of  the  ring  interested  them  so  much  that  for  a  while  they  forgot 
their own troubles. Balin in particular insisted on having the Gollum story, riddles 
and  all,  told  all  over  again, with  the  ring  in  its  proper  place. But  after  a  time  the 
light  began  to  fail,  and  then  other  questions  were  asked.  Where  were  they,  and 
where was their path, and where was there any food, and what were they going to 
do  next?  These  questions  they  asked  over  and  over  again,  and  it  was  from  little 
Bilbo  that  they seemed  to expect  to get  the answers. From which you can see  that 
they had changed their opinion of Mr. Baggins very much, and had begun to have 
a  great  respect  for  him  (as  Gandalf  had  said  they  would).  Indeed  they  really 
expected  him  to  think  of  some  wonderful  plan  for  helping  them,  and  were  not 
merely  grumbling.  They  knew  only  too  well  that  they  would  soon  all  have  been 
dead, if it had not been for the hobbit; and they thanked him many times. Some of 
them even got up and bowed right to the ground before him, though they fell over 
with  the  effort,  and  could  not  get  on  their  legs  again  for  some  time. Knowing  the 
truth about  the vanishing did not  lessen  their opinion of Bilbo at all;  for  they saw 
that  he  had  some  wits,  as  well  as  luck  and  a  magic  ring-and  all  three  are  very 
useful possessions. In fact they praised him so much that Bilbo began to feel there 
really  was  something  of  a  bold  adventurer  about  himself  after  all,  though  he  I 
would have felt a lot bolder still, if there had been anything to eat. 
But there was nothing, nothing at all; and none of them Were fit to go and look 
for  anything,  or  to  search  for  the  lost  path.  The  lost  path!  No  other  idea  would 

####-come into Bilbo's tired head. He just sat staring in front of him at the endless trees; 
and  after  a while  they  all  fell  silent  again. All  except Balin. Long  after  the others 
had  stopped  talking  and  shut  their  eyes,  he  kept  on  muttering  and  chuckling  to 
himself. 
"Gollum! Well I'm blest! So that's how he sneaked past me is it? Now I know! 
Just  crept  quietly  along  did  you,  Mr.  Baggins?  Buttons  all  over  the  doorstep? 
Good  old  Bilbo-Bilbo-Bilbo-bo-bo-bo–"  And  then  he  fell  asleep,  and  there  was 
complete silence for a long time. 
All  of  a  sudden Dwalin  opened  an  eye,  and  looked  round  at  them.  "Where  is 
Thorin?"  he  asked.  It  was  a  terrible  shock.  Of  course  there  were  only  thirteen of 
them,  twelve dwarves and  the hobbit. Where  indeed was Thorin? They wondered 
what  evil  fate  had  befallen  him,  magic  or  dark  monsters;  and  shuddered  as  they 
lay  lost  in  the  forest. There  they dropped off one by one  into uncomfortable  sleep 
full  of  horrible  dreams,  as  evening wore  to  black  night;  and  there we must  leave 
them for the present, too sick and weary to set guards or take turns watching. 
Thorin  had  been  caught  much  faster  than  they  had.  You  remember  Bilbo 
falling  like  a  log  into  sleep,  as  he  stepped  into  a  circle  of  light?  The  next  time  it 
had  been  Thorin  who  stepped  forward,  and  as  the  lights  went  out  he  fell  like  a 
stone  enchanted.  All  the  noise  of  the  dwarves  lost  in  the  night,  their  cries  as  the 
spiders caught them and bound them, and all the sounds of the battle next day, had 
passed over him unheard. Then the Wood-elves had come to him, and bound him, 
and carried him away. The feasting people were Wood-elves, of course. These are 
not wicked folk. If they have a fault it is distrust of strangers. Though their magic 
was strong, even in those days they were wary. They differed from the High Elves 
of  the West,  and were more  dangerous  and  less wise.  For most  of  them  (together 
with  their  scattered  relations  in  the hills  and mountains) were  descended from the 
ancient  tribes  that never went  to Faerie  in  the West. There  the Light-elves and the 
Deep-elves  and  the  Sea-elves  went  and  lived  for  ages,  and  grew  fairer  and  wiser 
and more learned, and invented their magic and their cunning craft, in the making 
of  beautiful  and marvellous  things,  before  some  came  back  into  the Wide World. 
In  the Wide World  the Wood-elves  lingered  in  the  twilight of  our Sun  and Moon 
but  loved  best  the  stars;  and  they  wandered  in  the  great  forests  that  grew  tall  in 
lands  that  are  now  lost.  They  dwelt  most  often  by  the  edges  of  the  woods,  from 
which they could escape at times to hunt, or to ride and run over the open lands by 
moonlight or starlight; and after the coming of Men they took ever more and more 
to  the  gloaming  and  the  dusk. Still  elves  they were  and  remain,  and  that  is Good 
People. 

####-In  a  great  cave  some  miles  within  the  edge  of  Mirkwood  on  its  eastern  side 
there  lived  at  this  time  their  greatest  king. Before  his  huge  doors  of  stone  a  river 
ran  out  of  the  heights  of  the  forest  and  flowed on  and out  into  the marshes  at  the 
feet of the high wooded lands. This great cave, from which countless smaller ones 
opened  out  on  every  side,  wound  far  underground  and  had  many  passages  and 
wide  halls;  but  it was  lighter  and more wholesome  than  any  goblin-dwelling, and 
neither so deep nor so dangerous. In fact the subjects of the king mostly lived and 
hunted  in  the  open  woods,  and  had  houses  or  huts  on  the  ground  and  in  the 
branches. The  beeches were  their  favourite  trees. The  king's  cave  was his palace, 
and  the  strong  place  of  his  treasure,  and  the  fortress  of  his  people  against  their 
enemies. 
It was  also  the  dungeon  of  his  prisoners.  So  to  the  cave  they  dragged Thorin-
not  too  gently,  for  they  did  not  love  dwarves,  and  thought  he  was  an  enemy.  In 
ancient days  they had had wars with some of  the dwarves, whom  they accused of 
stealing  their  treasure.  It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  the  dwarves  gave  a  different 
account, and said that they only took what was their due, for the elf-king had bar- 
gained with  them  to  shape  his  raw  gold  and  silver,  and  had  afterwards  refused  to 
give  them  their  pay.  If  the  elf-king had  a weakness  it was  for  treasure,  especially 
for  silver  and  white  gems;  and  though  his  hoard  was  rich,  he  was  ever  eager  for 
more, since he  had not yet  as great  a  treasure  as other  elf-lords of old. His people 
neither mined nor worked metals or jewels, nor did they bother much with trade or 
with  tilling  the  earth.  All  this  was  well  known  to  every  dwarf,  though  Thorin's 
family had had nothing  to do with the old quarrel I have spoken of. Consequently 
Thorin was angry at their treatment of him, when they took their spell off him and 
he came  to his senses; and also he was determined  that no word of gold or  jewels 
should be dragged out of him. 
The  king  looked  sternly  on  Thorin,  when  he  was  brought  before  him,  and 
asked him many questions. But Thorin would only say that he was starving. 
"Why  did  you  and  your  folk  three  times  try  to  attack  my  people  at  their 
merrymaking?" asked the king. 
"We  did  not  attack  them,"  answered  Thorin;  "we  came  to  beg,  because  we 
were starving." 
"Where are your friends now, and what are they doing?" 
"I don't know, but I expect starving in the forest." 
"What were you doing in the forest?" 
"Looking for food and drink, because we were starving." 
"But what brought you into the forest at all?" asked the king angrily.  

####-At that Thorin shut his mouth and would not say another word. 
"Very well!"  said  the  king.  "Take  him  away  and  keep  him  safe,  until  he  feels 
inclined to tell the truth, even if he waits a hundred years.'" 
Then the elves put thongs on him, and shut him in one of the inmost caves with 
strong wooden doors, and left him. They gave him food and drink, plenty of both, 
if  not  very  fine;  for  Wood-elves  were  not  goblins,  and  were  reasonably  well-
behaved even  to  their worst enemies, when  they captured  them. The giant  spiders 
were the only living things that they had no mercy upon. 
There  in  the  king's  dungeon  poor  Thorin  lay;  and  after  he  had  got  over  his 
thankfulness  for bread  and meat and water, he began to wonder what had become 
of  his  unfortunate  friends.  It  was  not  very  long  before  he  discovered;  but  that 
belongs  to  the  next  chapter  and  the  beginning  of  another  adventure  in  which  the 
hobbit again showed his usefulness. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 9 </h4> <br> <br>

Barrels Out of Bond 

 
The day  after  the battle with  the  spiders Bilbo  and  the dwarves made one  last 
despairing effort  to find a way out before  they died of hunger and  thirst. They got 
up  and  staggered  on  in  the  direction  which  eight  out  of  the  thirteen  of  them 
guessed to be the one in which the path lay; but they never found out if they were 
right.  Such  day  as  there  ever  was  in  the  forest  was  fading  once  more  into  the 
blackness of night, when  suddenly out  sprang  the  light of many  torches  all  round 
them,  like  hundreds  of  red  stars.  Out  leaped  Wood-elves  with  their  bows  and 
spears and called the dwarves to halt. 
There  was  no  thought  of  a  fight.  Even  if  the  dwarves  had  not  been  in  such  a 
state  that  they  were  actually  glad  to  be  captured,  their  small  knives,  the  only 
weapons  they had, would have been of no use against  the arrows of  the elves  that 
could  hit  a  bird's  eye  in  the  dark. So  they  simply  stopped  dead  and  sat  down  and 
waited-all except Bilbo, who popped on his ring and slipped quickly to one side. 
That  is why, when  the  elves bound  the dwarves  in  a  long  line, one behind  the 
other,  and  counted  them,  they  never  found  or  counted  the  hobbit.  Nor  did  they 
hear  or  feel  him  trotting  along  well  behind  their  torch-light  as  they  led  off  their 
prisoners  into  the  forest.  Each  dwarf  was  blindfold,  but  that  did  not  make  much 
difference,  for  even Bilbo with  the  use  of  his  eyes  could  not  see where  they were 
going,  and  neither  he  nor  the  others  knew  where  they  had  started  from  anyway. 
Bilbo  had  all  he  could  do  to  keep  up with  the  torches,  for  the  elves were making 
the dwarves go  as  fast  as  ever  they  could,  sick  and weary  as  they were. The king 
had ordered them to make haste. Suddenly the torches stopped, and the hobbit had 
just  time  to  catch  them  up  before  they  began  to  cross  the  bridge.  This  was  the 
bridge  that  led  across  the  river  to  the  king's  doors.  The  water  flowed  dark  and 
swift and strong beneath; and at the far end were gates before the mouth of a huge 
cave  that  ran  into  the  side  of  a  steep  slope  covered  with  trees.  There  the  great 
beeches came right down to the bank, till their feet were in the stream. Across this 
bridge the elves thrust their prisoners, but Bilbo hesitated in the rear. He did not at 
all  like  the  look  of  the  cavern-mouth  and  he  only made  up  his mind  not  to desert 
his friends just in time to scuttle over at the heels of the fast elves, before the great 
gates of the king closed behind them with a clang. 
Inside  the  passages  were  lit  with  red  torch-light,  and  the  elf-guards  sang  as 
they marched along  the  twisting, crossing, and echoing paths. These were not like 

####-those  of  the  goblin-cities:  they  were  smaller,  less  deep  underground,  and  filled 
with  a  cleaner  air.  In  a  great  hall with  pillars  hewn  out  of  the  living  stone  sat  the 
Elvenking on a chair of carven wood. On his head was a crown of berries and red 
leaves,  for  the  autumn  was  come  again.  In  the  spring  he  wore  a  crown  of 
woodland flowers. In his hand he held a carven staff of oak. 
The prisoners were brought before him; and though he looked grimly at them, 
he  told  his  men  to  unbind  them,  for  they  were  ragged  and  weary.  "Besides  they 
need no ropes in here," said he. "There is no escape from my magic doors for those 
who are once brought inside." 
Long and searchingly he questioned the dwarves about their doings, and where 
they were going to, and where they were coming from; but he got little more news 
out  of  them  than  out  of  Thorin.  They  were  surly  and  angry  and  did  not  even 
pretend to be polite. 
"What  have  we  done,  O  king?"  said  Balin,  who  was  the  eldest  left.  "Is  it  a 
crime  to  be  lost  in  the  forest,  to  be  hungry  and  thirsty,  to  be  trapped  by  spiders? 
Are  the  spiders your  tame beasts or your pets,  if killing  them makes you  angry?" 
Such a question of course made the king angrier than ever, and he answered: "It is 
a crime  to wander  in my  realm without  leave. Do you  forget  that you were  in my 
kingdom,  using  the  road  that  my  people  made?  Did  you  not  three  times  pursue 
and  trouble  my  people  in  the  forest  and  '  rouse  the  spiders  with  your  riot  and 
clamour?  After  all  the  disturbance  you  have  made  I  have  a  right  to  know  what 
brings you here, and if you will not tell me now, I will keep you all in prison until 
you have learned sense and manners!" 
Then he ordered  the dwarves  each  to be put  in  a  separate  cell  and  to be given 
food and drink, but not  to be allowed  to pass  the doors of  their  little prisons, until 
one at  least of  them was willing  to  tell him all he wanted  to know. But be did not 
tell  them  that  Thorin  was  also  a  prisoner  with  him.  It  was  Bilbo  who  found  that 
out. 
 
Poor  Mr.  Baggins  –  it  was  a  weary  long  time  that  he  lived  in  that  place  all 
alone,  and  always  in  hiding,  never  daring  to  take  off  his  ring,  hardly  daring  to 
sleep,  even  tucked  away  in  the  darkest  and  remotest  comers  he  could  find.  For 
something  to  do  he  took  to wandering  about  the  Elven-king's palace. Magic shut 
the  gates,  but  be  could  sometimes  get  out,  if  he  was  quick.  Companies  of  the 
Wood-elves,  sometimes with  the  king  at  their  head, would  from  time  to  time  ride 
out  to hunt, or  to other business  in  the woods and in the lands to the East. Then if 
Bilbo  was  very  nimble,  he  could  slip  out  just  behind  them;  though  it  was  a 

####-dangerous  thing  to do. More  than once he was nearly caught  in  the doors, as  they 
clashed  together  when  the  last  elf  passed;  yet  he  did  not  dare  to  march  among 
them  because  of  his  shadow  (altogether  thin  and wobbly  as  it was  in  torch-light), 
or  for  fear  of  being  bumped  into  and  discovered. And when  he  did  go  out, which 
was  not  very  often,  he  did  no  good.  He  did  not  wish  to  desert  the  dwarves, and 
indeed he did not know where in the world to go without them. He could not keep 
up  with  the  hunting  elves  all  the  time  they  were  out,  so  he  never  discovered  the 
ways  out  of  the wood,  and was  left  to wander miserably  in  the  forest,  terrified  of 
losing  himself,  until  a  chance  came  of  returning. He was  hungry  too  outside,  for 
he was  no  hunter;  but  inside  the  caves  he  could  pick  up  a  living  of  some  sort  by 
stealing  food  from  store  or  table  when  no  one  was  at  hand.  "I  am  like  a  burglar 
that  can't  get  away,  but must  go  on miserably  burgling  the  same  house  day  after 
day,"  he  thought.  "This  is  the  dreariest  and  dullest  part  of  all  this  wretched, 
tiresome,  uncomfortable  adventure!  I  wish  I  was  back  in  my  hobbit-hole  by my 
own warm fireside with the lamp shining!" He often wished, too, that he could get 
a message for help sent to the wizard, but that of course was quite impossible; and 
he soon  realized  that  if anything was  to be done,  it would have  to be done by Mr. 
Baggins, alone and unaided. 
Eventually,  after  a week  or  two  of  this  sneaking  sort  of  life,  by watching  and 
following  the  guards  and  taking  what  chances  he  could,  he  managed  to  find  out 
where each dwarf was kept. He found all their twelve cells in different parts of the 
palace,  and  after  a  time  he  got  to  know  his  way  about  very  well.  What  was  his 
surprise one day to overhear some of the guards talking and to learn that there was 
another dwarf in prison too, in a specially deep dark place. He guessed at once, of 
course,  that  that was  Thorin;  and  after  a while he  found  that his guess was  right. 
At  last  after  many  difficulties  he  managed  to  find  the  place  when  no  one  was 
about, and to have a word with the chief of the dwarves. Thorin was too wretched 
to  be  angry  any  longer  at  his  misfortunes,  and  was  even  beginning  to  think  of 
telling the king all about his treasure and his quest (which shows how low-spirited 
he had become), when he heard Bilbo's little voice at his keyhole. He could hardly 
believe  his  ears.  Soon  however  he  made  up  his  mind  that  he  could  not  be 
mistaken, and he came  to  the door and had a  long whispered  talk with  the hobbit 
on the other side. 
So  it was  that Bilbo was  able  to  take  secretly Thorin's message  to  each of  the 
other  imprisoned  dwarves,  telling  them  that  Thorin  their  chief was  also  in prison 
close  at  hand,  and  that  no  one was  to  reveal  their  errand  to  the  long,  not  yet,  not 
before  Thorin  gave  the  word.  For  Thorin  had  taken  heart  again  hearing  how  the 

####-hobbit  had  rescued  his  companions  from  the  spiders,  and  was  determined  once 
more  not  to  ransom  himself  with  promises  to  the  king  of  a  share  in  the  treasure, 
until  all  hope  of  escaping  in  any  other  way  had  disappeared;  until  in  fact  the 
remarkable Mr. Invisible Baggins (of whom he began to have a very high opinion 
indeed) had altogether failed to think of something clever.  
The  other  dwarves  quite  agreed when  they  got  the message. They  all  thought 
their  own  shares  in  the  treasure  (which  they  quite  regarded  as  theirs,  in  spite  of 
their plight  and  the  still unconquered dragon) would  suffer  seriously if the Wood-
elves  claimed  part  of  it,  and  they  all  trusted  Bilbo.  Just  what  Gandalf  had  said 
would  happen,  you  see.  Perhaps  that  war  part  of  his  reason  for  going  off  and 
leaving them. 
Bilbo,  however,  did  not  feel  nearly  so  hopeful  as  they  did.  He  did  not  like 
being depended on by everyone, and he wished he had the wizard at hand. But that 
was no use: probably all the dark distance of Mirkwood lay between them. He sat 
and  thought  and  thought,  until  his  head  nearly  burst,  but  no  bright  idea  would 
come. One  invisible  ring was  a  very  fine  thing,  but  it was  not much  good  among 
fourteen. But of course, as you have guessed, he did  rescue his  friends  in  the end, 
and  this  is  how  it  happened.  One  day,  nosing  and  wandering  about.  Bilbo 
discovered  a  very  interesting  thing:  the  great  gates  were  not  the  only  entrance  to 
the  caves.  A  stream  flowed  under  part  of  the  lowest  regions  of  the  palace,  and 
joined the Forest River some way further to the east, beyond the steep slope out of 
which  the  main  mouth  opened.  Where  this  underground watercourse  came  forth 
from the hillside there was a water-gate. There the rocky roof came down close to 
the surface of the stream, and from it a portcullis could be dropped right to the bed 
of  the  river  to  prevent  anyone  coming  in  or  out  that way. But  the  portcullis was 
often open,  for a good deal of  traffic went out and  in by  the water-gate. If anyone 
had come in that way, he would have found himself in a dark rough tunnel leading 
deep into the heart of the hill; but at one point where it  passed under the caves the 
roof  had  been  cut  away  and  covered  with  great  oaken  trapdoors.  These  opened 
upwards  into  the  king's  cellars.  There  stood  barrels,  and  barrels,  and  barrels;  for 
the Wood-elves, and especially their king, were very fond of wine, though no vines 
grew in those parts. The wine, and other goods, were brought from far away, from 
their kinsfolk in the South, or from the vineyards of Men in distant lands. 
Hiding  behind  one  of  the  largest  barrels  Bilbo  discovered  the  trapdoors  and 
their  use,  and  lurking  there,  listening  to  the  talk of  the king's  servants, he  learned 
how the wine and other goods came up the rivers, or over land, to the Long Lake. 
It  seemed  a  town of Men  still  throve  there, built out on bridges  far  into  the water 

####-as  a  protection  against  enemies  of  all  sorts,  and  especially  against  the  dragon  of 
the  Mountain.  From  Lake-town  the  barrels  were  brought  up  the  Forest  River. 
Often they were just tied together like big rafts and poled or rowed up the stream; 
sometimes they were loaded on to flat boats. 
When  the  barrels  were  empty  the  elves  cast  them  through  the  trapdoors, 
opened  the  water-gate,  and  out  the  barrels  floated  on  the  stream,  bobbing  along, 
until they were carried by the current to a place far down the river where the bank 
jutted  out,  near  to  the  very  eastern  edge  of Mirkwood. There  they were  collected 
and  tied  together  and  floated  back  to  Lake-town,  which  stood  close  to  the  point 
where the Forest River flowed into the Long Lake. 
 
For  some  time Bilbo  sat and  thought about  this water-gate, and wondered if it 
could  be  used  for  the  escape  of  his  friends,  and  at  last  he  had  the  desperate 
beginnings of a plan. 
The  evening meal had been  taken  to  the prisoners. The guards were  tramping 
away  down  the  passages  taking  the  torch-light  with  them  and  leaving  everything 
in  darkness.  Then  Bilbo  heard  the  king's  butler  bidding  the  chief  of  the  guards 
good-night. 
"Now come with me," he said, "and taste the new wine that has just come in. I 
shall be hard at work tonight clearing the cellars of the empty wood, so let us have 
a drink first to help the labour." 
"Very good," laughed the chief of the guards. "I'll taste with you, and see if it is 
fit for the king's table. There is a feast tonight and it would not do to send up poor 
stuff!" 
 
When  he  heard  this  Bilbo  was  all  in  a  flutter,  for  he  saw  that  luck  was  with 
him  and  he  had  a  chance  at  once  to  try  his  desperate  plan.  He  followed  the  two 
elves, until  they entered a small cellar and sat down at a  table on which  two  large 
flagons were set. Soon they began to drink and laugh merrily. Luck of an unusual 
kind was with Bilbo  then.  It must be potent wine  to make a wood-elf drowsy; but 
this wine, it would seem, was the heady vintage of the great gardens of Dorwinion, 
not  meant  for  his  soldiers  or  his  servants,  but  for  the  king's  feasts  only,  and  for 
smaller bowls, not for the butler's great flagons. 
Very soon the chief guard nodded his head, then he laid it on the table and fell 
fast asleep. The butler went on talking and laughing to himself for a while without 
seeming to notice, but soon his head too nodded to the table, and he fell asleep and 
snored  beside  his  friend.  Then  in  crept  the  hobbit.  Very  soon  the chief guard had 

####-no  keys,  but Bilbo was  trotting  as  fast  as  he  could  along  the  passage  towards  the 
cells. The  great  bunch  seemed  very  heavy  to  his  arms,  and  his  heart was  often  in 
his  mouth,  in  spite  of  his  ring,  for  he  could  not  prevent  the  keys  from  making 
every now and then a loud clink and clank, which put him all in a tremble. 
First  he  unlocked  Balin's  door,  and  locked  it  again  carefully  as  soon  as  the 
dwarf was  outside. Balin was most  surprised,  as  you  can  imagine;  but  glad  as  he 
was  to  get  out  of  his  wearisome  little  stone  room,  he  wanted  to  stop  and  ask 
questions, and know what Bilbo was going to do, and all about it. 
"No  time  now!"  said  the  hobbit.  "You  must  follow  me!  We  must  all  keep 
together  and not  risk getting  separated. All of us must  escape or none,  and  this  is 
our  last  chance.  If  this  is  found out, goodness knows where  the king will put you 
next, with chains on your hands and feet  too, I expect. Don't argue,  there's a good 
fellow!" 
Then  off  he went  from  door  to  door,  until  his  following  had  grown  to  twelve-
none  of  them  any  too  nimble,  what  with  the  dark,  and  what  with  their  long 
imprisonment. Bilbo's heart thumped every time one of them bumped into another, 
or  grunted  or  whispered  in  the  dark.  "Drat  this  dwarvish  racket!"  he  said  to 
himself. But all went well, and they met no guards. As a matter of fact there was a 
great  autumn  feast  in  the woods  that night,  and  in  the halls  above. Nearly  all  the 
king's  folks  were  merrymaking.  At  last  after  much  blundering  they  came  to 
Thorin's  dungeon,  far  down  in  a  deep  place  and  fortunately  not  far  from  the 
cellars. 
"Upon my word!"  said Thorin, when Bilbo whispered to him to come out and 
join his  friends,  "Gandalf  spoke  true,  as usual. A pretty  fine burglar you make,  it 
seems,  when  the  time  comes.  I  am  sure  we  are  all  for  ever  at  your  service, 
whatever happens after this. But what comes next?" 
Bilbo saw that the time had come to explain his idea, as far as he could; but he 
did  not  feel  at  all  sure  bow  the  dwarves  would  take  it.  His  fears  were  quite 
justified, for they did not like it a bit, and started grumbling loudly in spite of their 
danger.  
"We  shall  be  bruised  and  battered  to  pieces,  and  drowned  too,  for  certain!" 
they muttered. "We thought you had got some sensible notion, when you managed 
to get hold of the keys. This is a mad idea!" 
"Very well!" said Bilbo very downcast, and also rather annoyed. "Come  along 
back  to  your  nice  cells,  and  I  will  lock  you  all  in  again,  and  you  can  sit  there 
comfortably  and  think  of  a  better  plan-but  I don't suppose  I shall ever get hold of 
the keys again, even if I feel inclined to try." 

####-"That  was  too  much  for  them,  and  they  calmed  down.  In  the  end,  of  course, 
they had to do just what Bilbo suggested, because it was obviously impossible for 
them  to  try  and  find  their  way  into  the  upper  halls,  or  to  fight  their  way  out  of 
gates  that  closed  by  magic;  and  it  was  no  good  grumbling  in  the  passages  until 
they were caught again. So following the hobbit, down into the lowest cellars they 
crept.  They  passed  a  door  through which  the  chief  guard  and  the  butler  could  be 
seen  still  happily  snoring  with  smiles  upon  their  faces.  The  wine  of Dorwinion 
brings  deep  and  pleasant  dreams.  There  would  be  a  different  expression  on  the 
face of  the  chief guard next day,  even  though Bilbo, before  they went on,  stole  in 
and kindheartedly put the keys back on his belt. 
"That  will  save  him  some  of  the  trouble  he  is  in  for,"  said  Mr.  Baggins  to 
himself.  "He wasn't  a  bad  fellow,  and  quite  decent  to  the  prisoners.  It will  puzzle 
them all too. They will think we had a very strong magic to pass through all those 
locked doors and disappear. Disappear! We have got to get busy very quick, if that 
is to happen!" 
 
Balin was  told  off  to watch  the  guard  and  the  butler  and  give warning  if  they 
stirred. The rest went  into  the adjoining cellar with  the  trapdoors. There was  little 
time  to  lose.  Before  long,  as  Bilbo  knew,  some  elves were  under  orders  to  come 
down and help  the butler get  the empty barrels  through  the doors  into  the  stream. 
These were in fact already standing in rows in the middle of the floor waiting to be 
pushed off. Some of them were wine-barrels, and these were not much use, as they 
could not easily be opened at the end without a deal of noise, nor could they easily 
be  secured  again.  But  among  them  were  several  others  which  had  been  used  for 
bringing other stuffs, butter, apples, and all sorts of things, to the king's palace. 
They  soon  found  thirteen with  room enough  for a dwarf  in each.  In  fact  some 
were  too  roomy,  and  as  they  climbed  in  the  dwarves  thought  anxiously  of  the 
shaking and  the bumping  they would get  inside,  though Bilbo did his best  to  find 
straw  and  other  stuff  to  pack  them  in  as  cosily  as  could  be  managed  in  a  short 
time. At  last  twelve  dwarves were  stowed. Thorin  had  given  a  lot  of  trouble,  and 
turned  and  twisted  in  his  tub  and  grumbled  like  a  large  dog  in  a  small  kennel; 
while Balin, who came last, made a great fuss about his air-holes and said he was 
stifling, even before his lid was on. Bilbo had done what he could to close holes in 
the  sides  of  the  barrels,  and  to  fix  on  all  the  lids  as  safely  as  could  be  managed, 
and  now  he  was  left  alone  again,  running  round  putting  the  finishing  touches-to 
the packing, and hoping against hope that his plan would come off. 

####-It  had  not  been  a-bit too soon. Only a minute or two after Balin's lid had been 
fitted  on  there  came  the  sound  of  voices  and  the  flicker  of  lights.  A  number  of 
elves  came  laughing  and  talking  into  the  cellars  and  singing  snatches  of  song. 
They had  left a merry feast  in one of  the halls and were bent on returning as soon 
as  they  could.  "Where's  old  Galion,  the  butler?"  said  one.  "I  haven't  seen  him  at 
the tables tonight. He ought to be here now to show us what is to be done." 
"I shall be angry  if  the old slowcoach  is  late," said another. "I have no wish  to 
waste time down here while the song is up!" 
"Ha, ha!" came a cry. "Here's  the old villain with his head on a jug! He's been 
having a little feast all to himself and his friend the captain." 
"Shake him! Wake him!" shouted the others impatiently. Gallon was not at all 
pleased at being shaken or wakened, and still  less at being  laughed at.  "You're all 
late," he grumbled. "Here am I waiting and waiting down here, while you fellows 
drink  and  make  merry  and  forget  your  tasks.  Small  wonder  if  I  fall  asleep  from 
weariness!" 
"Small  wonder,"  said  they,  "when  the  explanation  stands  close  at  hand  in  a 
jug! Come  give  us  a  taste  of  your  sleeping-draught before we  fall  to! No need  to 
wake the turnkey yonder. He has had his share by the looks of it." 
Then  they  drank  once  round  and  became  mighty  merry  all  of  a  sudden.  But 
they did not quite  lose  their wits. "Save us, Galion!" cried some, "you began your 
feasting  early  and  muddled  your  wits!  You  have  stacked  some  full  casks  here 
instead of the empty ones, if there is anything in weight." 
"Get on with the work!" growled the butler. "There is nothing in the feeling of 
weight  in  an  idle  toss-pot's  arms. These  are  the ones  to go  and no others. Do  as  I 
say!" 
"Very  well,  very  well,"  they  answered  rolling  the  barrels  to  the  opening.  "On 
your  head  be  it,  if  the  king's  full  buttertubs  and  his  best  wine  is  pushed  into  the 
river for the Lake-men to feast on for nothing!" 
 

Roll-roll-roll-roll, 
roll-roll-rolling down the hole I  
Heave ho! Splash plump ! 
Down they go, down they bump! 

 
So  they  sang as  first one barrel and  then another  rumbled  to  the dark opening 
and  was  pushed  over  into  the  cold  water  some  feet  below.  Some  were  barrels 
really empty, some were  tubs neatly packed with a dwarf each; but down  they all 
went,  one  after  another, with many  a  clash  and  a  bump,  thudding  on  top  of  ones 

####-below,  smacking  into  the water,  jostling against  the walls of  the  tunnel, knocking 
into one another, and bobbing away down the current. 
It was just at this moment that Bilbo suddenly discovered the weak point in his 
plan. Most  likely you  saw  it  some  time  ago  and have been  laughing  at him; but I 
don't suppose you would have done half as well yourselves in his place. Of course 
he was not  in a barrel himself, nor was  there anyone  to pack him  in, even  if  there 
had  been  a  chance!  It  looked  as  if  he  would  certainly  lose  his  friends  this  time 
(nearly  all  of  them  had  already  disappeared  through  the  dark  trap-door), and get 
utterly left behind and have to stay lurking as a permanent burglar in the elf-caves 
for ever. For even if he could have escaped through the upper gates at once, he had 
precious small chance of ever finding the dwarves again. He did not know the way 
by  land  to  the place where  the barrels were collected. He wondered what on earth 
would happen to them without him; for he had not had time to tell the dwarves all 
that  he  had  learned,  or what he had meant  to do, once  they were out of  the wood. 
While  all  these  thoughts  were  passing  through  his  mind,  the  elves  being  very 
merry  began  to  sing  a  song  round  the  river-door. Some had already gone  to haul 
on  the  ropes  which  pulled  up  the  portcullis  at  the  water-gate  so  as  to  let  out  the 
barrels as soon as they were all afloat below.  
 

Down the swift dark stream you go 
Back to lands you once did know! 
Leave the halls and caverns deep, 
Leave the northern mountains steep, 
Where the forest wide and dim 
Stoops in shadow grey and grim! 
Float beyond the world of trees 
Out into the whispering breeze, 
Past the rushes, past the reeds, 
Past the marsh's waving weeds, 
Through the mist that riseth white 
Up from mere and pool at night! 
Follow, follow stars that leap 
Up the heavens cold and steep; 
Turn when dawn comes over land, 
Over rapid, over sand, 
South away! and South away! 
Seek the sunlight and the day,  
Back to pasture, back to mead, 
Where the kine and oxen feed! 

####-Back to gardens on the hills 
Where the berry swells and fills 
Under sunlight, under day! 
South away! and South away! 
Down the swift dark stream you go 
Back to lands you once did know! 

 
Now  the  very  last  barrel  was  being  rolled  to  the  doors!  In  despair  and  not 
knowing what  else  to  do,  poor  little Bilbo  caught hold of  it  and was pushed over 
the edge with it. Down into the water he fell, splash! into the cold dark water with 
the  barrel  on  top  of  him. He  came  up  again  spluttering  and  clinging  to  the wood 
like a  rat, but  for all his efforts he could not scramble on top. Every time he tried, 
the  barrel  rolled  round  and  ducked  him  under  again.  It  was  really  empty,  and 
floated light as a cork. Though his ears were full of water, he could hear the elves 
still  singing  in  the  cellar  above.  Then  suddenly  the  trapdoors  fell  to with a boom 
and  their  voices  faded  away. He was  in  the  dark  tunnel,  floating  in  icy water,  all 
alone-for you cannot count friends that are all packed up in barrels. 
Very  soon a grey patch came up  in  the darkness ahead. He heard  the creak of 
the water-gate being hauled up, and he found that he was in the midst of a bobbing 
and  bumping mass  of  casks  and  tubs  all  pressing  together  to  pass  under  the  arch 
and  get  out  into  the  open  stream.  He  had  as  much  as  he  could  do  to  prevent 
himself  from  being  hustled  and  battered  to  bits;  but  at  last  the  jostling  crowd 
began to break up and swing off, one by one, under the stone arch and away. Then 
he saw  that  it would have been no good even  if he had managed  to get astride his 
barrel,  for  there was  no  room  to  spare, not  even  for  a hobbit, between  its  top  and 
the suddenly stooping roof where the gate was. 
 
Out  they  went  under  the  overhanging  branches  of  the  trees  on  either  bank. 
Bilbo  wondered  what  the  dwarves  were  feeling  and  whether  a  lot  of  water  was 
getting  into  their  tubs.  Some  of  those  that  bobbed  along  by  him  in  the  gloom 
seemed pretty low in the water, and he guessed that these had dwarves inside. 
"I do hope  I put  the  lids on  tight enough!" he  thought, but before  long he was 
worrying  too much  about  himself  to remember  the dwarves. He managed  to keep 
his head  above  the water, but he was  shivering with  the  cold,  and he wondered  if 
he would die of  it before  the  luck  turned, and how much  longer he would be able 
to hang on, and whether he should risk the chance of  letting go and trying to swim 
to the bank. 

####-The  luck  turned  all  right  before  long:  the  eddying  current  carried  several 
barrels  close  ashore  at  one  point  and  there  for  a  while  they  stuck  against  some 
hidden  root.  Then  Bilbo  took  the  opportunity  of  scrambling  up  the  side  of  his 
barrel while it was held steady against another. Up he crawled like a drowned rat, 
and lay on the top spread out to keep the balance as best he could. The breeze was 
cold  but  better  than  the water,  and  he  hoped  he would  not  suddenly  roll off again 
when  they  started  off  once  more.  Before  long  the  barrels  broke  free  again  and 
turned  and  twisted  off  down  the  stream,  and  out  into  the  main  current  Then  he 
found it quite as difficult to stick on as he had feared; but he managed it somehow, 
though  it was miserably uncomfortable. Luckily he was very  light, and  the barrel 
was  a  good  big  one  and  being  rather  leaky  had  now  shipped  a  small  amount  of 
water. All  the  same  it was  like  trying  to  ride, without  bridle  or  stirrups,  a  round-
bellied  pony  that  was  always  thinking  of  rolling  on  the  grass.  In  this  way  at  last 
Mr. Baggins came to a place where the trees on either hand grew thinner. He could 
see the paler sky between them. The dark river opened suddenly wide, and there it 
was  joined  to  the  main  water of  the Forest River  flowing down  in haste  from  the 
king's  great  doors.  There was  a  dim  sheet  of water  no  longer  overshadowed,  and 
on  its  sliding  surface  there were  dancing  and  broken  reflections  of  clouds  and  of 
stars. Then  the hurrying water of  the Forest River swept all the company of casks 
and tubs away to the north bank, in which it had eaten out a wide bay. This had a 
shingly  shore  under  hanging  banks  and  was  walled  at  the  eastern  end  by  a  little 
jutting  cape  of  hard  rock.  On  the  shallow  shore  most  of  the barrels  ran  aground, 
though a few went on to bump against the stony pier.  
There  were  people  on  the  look-out  on  the  banks.  They  quickly  poled  and 
pushed all the barrels together into the shallows, and when they had counted them 
they  roped  them  together and left them till the morning. Poor dwarves! Bilbo was 
not  so  badly  off  now.  He  slipped  from  his  barrel  and  waded  ashore,  and  then 
sneaked  along  to  some huts  that he  could  see near  the water's  edge. He no  longer 
thought  twice  about  picking  up  a  supper  uninvited  if  he  got  the  chance,  he  had 
been  obliged  to  do  it  for  so  long,  and  he  knew  only  too  well  what  it  was  to  be 
really  hungry,  not merely  politely  interested  in  the  dainties  of  a well-filled larder. 
Also he had caught a glimpse of a fire  through  the  trees, and that appealed to him 
with his dripping and ragged clothes clinging to him cold and clammy.  
 
There is no need to tell you much of his adventures that night, for now we are 
drawing  near  the  end  of  the  eastward  journey  and  coming  to  the  last  and  greatest 
adventure,  so  we  must  hurry  on.  Of  course  helped  by  his  magic  ring  he  got  on 

####-very well  at  first,  but  he was  given  away  in  the  end  by  his wet  footsteps  and  the 
trail of drippings that he left wherever he went or sat; and also he began to snivel, 
and  wherever  he  tried  to  hide  he  was  found  out  by  the  terrific  explosions  of  his 
suppressed  sneezes.  Very  soon  there  was  a  fine  commotion  in  the  village  by  the 
riverside; but Bilbo escaped  into  the woods carrying a  loaf and a  leather bottle of 
wine and a pie that did not belong to him. The rest of the night he had to pass wet 
as he was and far from a fire, but the bottle helped him to do that, and he actually 
dozed a little on some dry leaves, even though the year was getting late and the air 
was chilly.  
He woke again with a specially loud sneeze. It was already grey morning, and 
there was a merry racket down by the river. They were making up a raft of barrels, 
and  the  raft-elves  would  soon  be  steering  it  off  down  the  stream  to  Lake-town. 
Bilbo  sneezed  again.  He  was  no  longer  dripping  but  he  felt  cold  all  over.  He 
scrambled down as  fast as his  stiff  legs would  take him and managed  just  in  time 
to get on to the mass of casks without being noticed in the general bustle. Luckily 
there was  no  sun  at  the  time  to  cast  an  awkward  shadow,  and  for  a mercy he did 
not sneeze again for a good while. 
There  was  a  mighty  pushing  of  poles.  The  elves  that  were  standing  in  the 
shallow  .water  heaved  and  shoved.  The  barrels  now  all  lashed  together  creaked 
and fretted.  . 
"This is a heavy load!" some grumbled. "They float too deep-some of these are 
never  empty.  If  they  had  come  ashore  in  the  daylight, we might  have  had  a  look 
inside," they said. 
"No time now!" cried the raftman. "Shove off!" 
And off they went at last, slowly at first, until they had passed the point of rock 
where other elves stood  to fend  them off with poles, and  then quicker and quicker 
as  they  caught  the  main  stream  and  went  sailing  away  down,  down  towards  the 
Lake. 
They  had  escaped  the  dungeons  of  the  king  and  were  through  the wood,  but 
whether alive or dead still remains to be seen. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 10</h4> <br> 

A Warm Welcome 

 
The day grew lighter and warmer as they floated along. After a while the river 
rounded  a  steep  shoulder  of  land  that  came  down  upon  their  left. Under  its  rocky 
feet  like  an  inland  cliff  the  deepest  stream  had  flowed  lapping  and  bubbling. 
Suddenly  the  cliff  fell  away. The  shores  sank. The  trees  ended. Then Bilbo  saw  a 
sight: The  lands opened wide  about him,  filled with  the waters of  the  river which 
broke  up  and  wandered  in  a  hundred  winding  courses,  or  halted  in  marshes  and 
pools  dotted  with  isles  on  every  side:  but  still  a  strong  water  flowed  on  steadily 
through  the midst. And  far  away,  its  dark  head  in  a  torn  cloud,  there  loomed  the 
Mountain!  Its  nearest  neighbours  to  the  North-East  and  the  tumbled  land  that 
joined it to them could not be seen. All alone it rose and looked across the marshes 
to  the  forest.  The  Lonely  Mountain!  Bilbo  had  come  far  and  through  many 
adventures to see it, and now he did not like the look of it in the least. 
As  he  listened  to  the  talk  of  the  raftmen  and  pieced  together  the  scraps  of 
information  they  let  fall, he  soon  realized  that he was very  fortunate  ever  to have 
seen  it  at  all,  even  from  this  distance.  Dreary  as  had  been  his  imprisonment and 
unpleasant  as  was  his  position  (to  say  nothing  of  the  poor  dwarves  underneath 
him)  still,  he  had  been  more  lucky  than  he  had  guessed.  The  talk  was  all  of  the 
trade  that  came  and  went  on  the  waterways  and  the  growth  of  the  traffic  on  the 
river, as  the  roads out of  the East  towards Mirkwood vanished or  fell  into disuse; 
and of the bickerings of the Lake-men and the Wood-elves about the upkeep of the 
Forest River and the care of the banks. 
Those  lands  had  changed  much  since  the  days  when  dwarves  dwelt  in  the 
Mountain,  days  which  most  people  now  remembered  only  as  a  very  shadowy 
tradition.  They  had  changed  even  in  recent  years,  and  since  the  last  news  that 
Gandalf  had  had  of  them.  Great  floods  and  rains  had  swollen  the  waters  that 
flowed  east;  and  there had been  an  earthquake or  two  (which  some were  inclined 
to attribute to the dragon-alluding to him chiefly with a curse and an ominous nod 
in  the  direction  of  the  Mountain).  The  marshes  and  bogs  had  spread  wider  and 
wider  on  either  side.  Paths  had  vanished,  and many  a  rider  and wanderer  too,  if 
they  had  tried  to  find  the  lost  ways  across.  The  elf-road  through  the wood which 
the dwarves had followed on the advice of Beorn now came to a doubtful and little 
used  end  at  the  eastern  edge  of  the  forest;  only  the  river offered any  longer a safe 

####-way  from  the  skirts  of  Mirkwood  in  the  North  to  the  mountain-shadowed plains 
beyond, and the river was guarded by the Wood-elves' king. 
So  you  see Bilbo  had  come  in  the  end  by  the  only  road  that was  any  good.  It 
might have  been  some  comfort  to Mr. Baggins  shivering on  the barrels,  if he had 
known  that  news  of  this  had  reached  Gandalf  far  away  and  given  him  great 
anxiety, and  that he was  in  fact  finishing his other business  (which does not come 
into this tale) and getting ready to come in search of Thorin's company. But Bilbo 
did not know it. 
All he knew was that the river seemed to go on and on and on for ever, and he 
was  hungry,  and  had  a  nasty  cold  in  the  nose,  and  did  not  like  the  way  the 
Mountain seemed to frown at him and threaten him as it drew ever nearer. After a 
while, however,  the  river  took a more southerly course and  the Mountain  receded 
again,  and  at  last,  late  in  the  day  the  shores  grew  rocky,  the  river  gathered  all  its 
wandering  waters  together  into  a  deep  and  rapid  flood,  and  they  swept  along  at 
great speed. 
The  sun had  set when  turning with another  sweep  towards  the East  the  forest-
river  rushed  into  the  Long  Lake.  There  it  had  a  wide  mouth  with  stony  clifflike 
gates at either side whose feet were piled with shingles. The Long Lake! Bilbo had 
never  imagined  that  any  water  that  was  not  the  sea  could  look  so  big.  It  was  so 
wide  that  the  opposite  shores  looked  small  and  far,  but  it  was  so  long  that  its 
northerly end, which pointed towards the Mountain, could not be  seen at all. Only 
from the map did Bilbo know that away up there, where the stars of the Wain were 
already  twinkling,  the  Running  River  came  down  into  the  lake  from  Dale  and 
with  the  Forest  River  filled  with  deep  waters  what  must  once  have  been  a  great 
deep  rocky  valley. At  the  southern  end  the  doubled waters  poured  out  again  over 
high waterfalls  and  ran  away  hurriedly  to  unknown  lands.  In  the  still  evening  air 
the noise of the falls could be heard like a distant roar.  
Not  far  from  the mouth  of  the Forest River was the strange town he heard the 
elves speak of in the king's cellars. It was not built on the shore, though there were 
a  few  huts  and  buildings  there,  but  right  out  on  the  surface  of  the  lake,  protected 
from  the swirl of  the entering river by a promontory of rock which formed a calm 
bay. A great  . bridge made of wood ran out to where on huge piles made of forest 
trees  was  built  a  busy  wooden  town,  not  a  town  of  elves  but  of  Men,  who  still 
dared  to  dwell  here  under  the  shadow  of  the  distant  dragon-mountain. They  still 
throve  on  the  trade  that  came  up  the  great  river  from  the  South  and  was  carted 
past  the  falls  to  their  town;  but  in  the  great  days  of  old,  when  Dale  in  the  North 
was rich and prosperous, they had been wealthy and powerful, and there had been 

####-fleets  of  boats  on  the  waters,  and  some  were  filled  with  gold  and  some  with 
warriors  in  armour,  and  there  had  been  wars  and  deeds  which  were  now  only  a 
legend.  The  rotting  piles  of  a  greater  town  could  still  be  seen  along  the  shores 
when the waters sank in a drought. 
But men  remembered  little of  all  that,  though  some  still  sang old  songs of  the 
dwarf-kings  of  the Mountain,  Thror  and  Thrain  of  the  race  of  Durin,  and  of  the 
coming of the Dragon, and the fall of the lords of Dale. Some sang too that Thror 
and Thrain would  come  back  one  day  and  gold would  flow  in  rivers  through  the 
mountain-gates, and all that land would be filled with new song and new laughter. 
But this pleasant legend did not much affect their daily business. 
 
As  soon  as  the  raft  of  barrels  came  in  sight boats  rowed out  from  the piles of 
the  town,  and  voices  hailed  the  raft-steerers. Then  ropes were  cast  and oars were 
pulled,  and  soon  the  raft  was  drawn  out  of  the  current  of  the  Forest  River  and 
towed  away  round  the  high  shoulder  of  rock  into  the  little  bay  of  Lake-town. 
There  it  was  moored  not  far  from  the  shoreward  head  of  the  great  bridge.  Soon 
men would come up  from  the South and  take  some of  the casks away, and others 
they would fill with goods they had brought to be taken back up the stream to the 
Wood-elves' home. In the meanwhile the barrels were left afloat while the elves of 
the raft and the boatmen went to feast in Lake-town. 
They would have been surprised, if they could have seen what happened down 
by  the  shore,  after  they  had  gone  and  the  shades  of  night  had  fallen. First  of  all  a 
barrel was  cut  loose  by Bilbo  and  pushed  to  the  shore  and  opened. Groans  came 
from  inside,  and  out  crept  a most  unhappy  dwarf. Wet  straw was  in  his  draggled 
beard;  he  was  so  sore  and  stiff,  so  bruised  and  buffeted  he  could  hardly  stand  or 
stumble through the shallow water to lie groaning on the shore. He had a famished 
and a savage look like a dog that has been chained and forgotten in a kennel for a 
week.  It was Thorin,  but  you  could  only  have  told  it  by his golden chain, and by 
the  colour  of  his  now  dirty  and  tattered  sky-blue  hood  with  its  tarnished  silver 
tassel. It was some time before he would be even polite to the hobbit. 
"Well,  are  you  alive  or  are  you  dead?"  asked  Bilbo  quite  crossly.  Perhaps  he 
had  forgotten  that he had had  at  least one good meal more  than  the dwarves,  and 
also  the use of his  arms  and  legs, not  to  speak of  a greater  allowance of  air.  "Are 
you still in prison, or are you free? If you want food, and if you want to go on with 
this silly adventure- it's yours after all and not mine-you had better slap your arms 
and rub your legs and try and help me get the others out while there is a chance!" 

####-Thorin  of  course  saw  the  sense  of  this,  so  after  a  few  more  groans  he  got  up 
and  helped  the  hobbit as well as he could.  In  the darkness  floundering  in  the cold 
water  they had a difficult and very nasty  job  finding which were  the  right barrels. 
Knocking  outside  and  calling  only  discovered  about  six  dwarves  that  could 
answer.  They  were  unpacked  and  helped  ashore where  they  sat  or  lay muttering 
and  moaning;  they  were  so  soaked  and  bruised  and  cramped  that  they  could 
hardly yet realize their release or be properly thankful for it. 
Dwalin  and  Balin  were  two  of  the most  unhappy,  and  it  was  no  good  asking 
them  to  help.  Bifur  and  Bofur  were  less  knocked  about  and  drier,  but  they  lay 
down  and  would  do  nothing.  Fili  and  Kili,  however,  who  were  young  (for 
dwarves) and had also been packed more neatly with plenty of  straw  into  smaller 
casks, came out more or less smiling, with only a bruise or two and a stiffness that 
soon wore off. 
"I hope I never smell the smell of apples again!" said Fili. "My tub was full of 
it.  To  smell  apples  everlastingly  when  you  can  scarcely  move  and  are  cold  and 
sick  with  hunger  is  maddening.  I  could  eat  anything  in  the  wide  world  now,  for 
hours on end-but not an apple!" 
With  the willing help of Fili  and Kili, Thorin  and Bilbo  at  last discovered  the 
remainder  of  the  company  and  got  them  out.  Poor  fat  Bombur  was  asleep  or 
senseless; Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin and Gloin were waterlogged and seemed only half 
alive; they all had to be carried one by one and laid helpless on the shore. 
"Well! Here we are!" said Thorin. "And I suppose we ought to thank our stars 
and Mr. Baggins. I am sure he has a right to expect it, though I wish he could have 
arranged  a  more  comfortable  journey.  Still-all  very  much  at  your  service  once 
more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt we shall feel properly grateful, when we are fed and 
recovered. In the meanwhile what next?" 
"I suggest Lake-town," said Bilbo, "What else is there?" Nothing else could, of 
course, be suggested; so leaving the others Thorin and Fili and Kili and the hobbit 
went  along  the  shore  to  the  great  bridge. There were  guards  at  the  head  of  it,  but 
they were  not  keeping very careful watch,  for  it was  so  long  since  there had been 
any  real  need. Except  for  occasional  squabbles  about  river-tolls they were friends 
with the Wood-elves. Other folk were far away; and some of the younger people in 
the town openly doubted the existence of any dragon in the mountain, and laughed 
at  the greybeards and gammers who  said  that  they had  seen him  flying  in  the  sky 
in  their  young  days.  That  being  so  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  guards  were 
drinking  and  laughing  by  a  fire  in  their  hut,  and  did  not  hear  the  noise  of  the 

####-unpacking  of  the  dwarves  or  the  footsteps  of  the  four  scouts.  Their  astonishment 
was enormous when Thorin Oakenshield stepped in through the door.  
"Who  are  you  and what  do  you want?"  they  shouted  leaping  to  their  feet  and 
gipping for weapons. 
"Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the Mountain!" said the dwarf 
in  a  loud  voice,  and  he  looked  it,  in  spite  of  his  torn  clothes  and  draggled  hood. 
The  gold  gleamed  on  his  neck  and  waist:  his  eyes  were  dark  and  deep.  "I  have 
come back. I wish to see the Master of your town!" 
Then  there  was  tremendous  excitement.  Some  of  the  more  foolish  ran  out  of 
the  hut  as  if  they  expected  the  Mountain  to  go  golden  in  the  night  and  all  the 
waters  of  the  lake  to  turn  yellow  right  away.  The  captain  of  the  guard  came 
forward. 
"And who are these?" he asked, pointing to Fili and: Kili and Bilbo. 
"The sons of my father's daughter," answered Thorin, "Fili and Kili of the race 
of Durin, and Mr. Baggins who has travelled with us out of the West." 
"If you come in peace lay down your arms!" said the captain. 
"We  have  none,"  said  Thorin,  and  it  was  true  enough:  their  knives  had  been 
taken from them by the wood-elves, and the great sword Orcrist too. Bilbo had his 
short sword, hidden as usual, but he said nothing about that. "We have no need of 
weapons,  who  return  at  last  to  our  own  as  spoken  of  old.  Nor  could  we  fight 
against so many. Take us to your master!" 
"He is at feast," said the captain. 
"Then all the more reason for taking us to him," burst in Fili, who was getting 
impatient at these solemnities. "We are worn and famished after our long road and 
we have sick comrades. Now make haste and  let us have no more words, or your 
master may have something to say to you." 
"Follow me  then,"  said  the  captain,  and with  six men  about  them he  led  them 
over  the bridge  through  the gates and  into  the market-place of the town. This was 
a  wide  circle  of  quiet  water  surrounded  by  the  tall  piles  on  which  were  built  the 
greater  houses,  and  by  long  wooden  quays  with  many  steps  and  ladders  going 
down  to  the  surface  of  the  lake. From  one  great  hall  shone many  lights  and  there 
came  the  sound  of many  voices.  They  passed  its  doors  and  stood  blinking  in  the 
light looking at long tables filled with folk. 
"I  am Thorin  son  of Thrain  son of Thror King under the Mountain! I return!" 
cried Thorin in a loud voice from the door, before the captain could say anything. 
All  leaped  to  their  feet.  The Master  of  the  town  sprang  from  his  great  chair.  But 

####-none  rose  in greater surprise  than  the  raft-men of the elves who were sitting at the 
lower end of the hall. Pressing forward before the Master's table they cried: 
"These  are  prisoners  of  our  king  that  have  escaped,  wandering  vagabond 
dwarves that could not give any good account of themselves, sneaking through the 
woods and molesting our people!" 
"Is  this  true?"  asked  the  Master.  As  a  matter  of  fact  he  thought  it  far  more 
likely than the return of the King under the Mountain, if any such person had ever 
existed. 
"It  is  true  that we were wrongfully waylaid by the Elven-king and imprisoned 
without  cause  as  we  journeyed  back  to  our  own  land,"  answered  Thorin.  "But 
lock  nor  bar  may  hinder  the  homecoming  spoken  of  old.  Nor  is  this  town  in  the 
Wood-elves' realm. I speak to the Master of the town of the Men of the lake, not to 
the raft-men of the king." 
Then  the  Master  hesitated  and  looked  from  one  to  the  other.  The  Elvenking 
was  very  powerful  in  those  parts  and  the Master wished  for  no  enmity with  him, 
nor did he  think much of old songs, giving his mind  to  .trade and tolls, to cargoes 
and  gold,  to  which  habit  he  owed  his  position.  Others  were  of  different  mind, 
however,  and  quickly  the  matter  was  settled  without  him.  The  news  had  spread 
from  the  doors  of  the  hall  like  fire  through  all  the  town.  People  were  shouting 
inside  the  hall  and  outside  it. The  quays were  thronged with  hurrying  feet.  Some 
began  to  sing  snatches  of  old  songs  concerning  the  return  of  the  King  under  the 
Mountain;  that  it was Thror's grandson not Thror himself  that had come back did 
not bother them at all. Others took up the song and it rolled loud and high over the 
lake. 
 

The King beneath the mountains, 
The King of carven stone, 
The lord of silver fountains 
Shall come into his own! 
 
His crown shall be upholden, 
His harp shall be restrung, 
His halls shall echo golden 
To songs of yore re-sung. 
 
The woods shall wave on mountains 
And grass beneath the sun; 
His wealth shall flow in fountains 
And the rivers golden run. 

####- 
The streams shall run in gladness, 
The lakes shall shine and burn, 
And sorrow fail and sadness 
At the Mountain -king's return! 
 
So they sang, or very like that, only there was a great deal more of it, and there 
was much  shouting as well as  the music of harps and of  fiddles mixed up with  it. 
Indeed  such  excitement  had  not  been  known  in  the  town  in  the  memory  of  the 
oldest  grandfather. The Wood-elves  themselves began  to wonder greatly and even 
to  be  afraid.  They  did  not  know  of  course  how  Thorin  had  escaped,  and  they 
began to think their king might have made a serious mistake. As for the Master he 
saw  there was nothing else for  it but  to obey  the general clamour, for  the moment 
at any rate, and to pretend to believe that Thorin was what he said. So he gave up 
to  him  his  own  great  chair  and  set  Fili  and  Kili  beside  him  in  places  of  honour.  
Even  Bilbo  was  given  a  seat  at  the  high  table,  and  no  explanation  of  where  he 
came  in-no  songs  had  alluded  to  him  even  in  the  obscurest way-was asked  for  in 
the general bustle. 
Soon afterwards  the other dwarves were brought  into  the  town amid scenes of 
astonishing enthusiasm. They were all doctored and fed and housed and pampered 
in  the  most  delightful  and  satisfactory  fashion.  A  large  house  was  given  up  to 
Thorin  and  his  company;  boats  and  rowers were  put  at  their  service;  and  crowds 
sat outside and sang  songs all day, or cheered if any dwarf showed so much as his 
nose. 
Some of the songs were old ones; but some of them were quite new and spoke 
confidently  of  the  sudden  death  of  the  dragon  and  of  cargoes  of  rich  presents 
coming  down  the  river  to  Lake-town.  These were  inspired  largely  by  the Master 
and  they  did  not  particularly  please  the  dwarves,  but  in  the  meantime  they  were 
well  contented  and  they  quickly  grew  fat  and  strong  again.  Indeed within  a week 
they  were  quite  recovered,  fitted  out  in  fine  cloth  of  their  proper  colours,  with 
beards combed and trimmed, and proud steps. Thorin looked and walked as if his 
kingdom was already regained and Smaug chopped up into little pieces. 
Then,  as he had  said,  the dwarves' good  feeling  towards  the  little hobbit grew 
stronger  every  day.  There  were  no  more  groans  or  grumbles.  They  drank  his 
health, and they patted him on the back, and they made a great fuss of him; which 
was just as well, for he was not feeling particularly cheerful. He had not forgotten 
the  look  of  the  Mountain,  nor  the  thought  of  the  dragon,  and  he  had  besides  a 

####-shocking  cold.  For  three  days  he  sneezed  and  coughed,  and  he  could  not  go  out, 
and even after that his speeches at banquets were limited to "Thag you very buch." 
 
In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone back up the Forest River with their 
cargoes,  and  there  was  great  excitement  in  the  king's  palace.  I  have  never  heard 
what  happened  to  the  chief  of  the  guards  and  the  butler.  Nothing  of  course  was 
ever said about keys or barrels while  the dwarves stayed in Lake-town, and Bilbo 
was careful never to become invisible. Still, I daresay, more was guessed than was 
known, though doubtless Mr. Baggins remained a bit of a mystery. In any case the 
king knew now the dwarves' errand, or thought he did, and he said to himself: 
"Very well! We'll see! No treasure will come back through Mirkwood without 
my having something to say in the matter. But I expect they will all come to a bad 
end, and serve them right!" He at any rate did not believe in dwarves fighting and 
killing  dragons  like  Smaug,  and  he  strongly  suspected  attempted  burglary  or 
something  like  it  which  shows  he  was  a  wise  elf  and  wiser  than  the  men  of  the 
town, though not quite right, as we shall see in the end. He sent out his spies about 
the  shores  of  the  lake  and  as  far northward  towards  the Mountains  as  they would 
go, and waited. 
At  the  end  of  a  fortnight  Thorin  began  to  think  of  departure.  While  the 
enthusiasm  still  lasted  in  the  town was  the  time  to get help.  It would not do  to  let 
everything  cool  down  with  delay.  So  he  spoke  to  the  Master  and  his  councillors 
and said that soon he and his company must go on towards the Mountain. 
Then for  the first  time  the Master was surprised and a  little frightened; and he 
wondered  if  Thorin  was  after  all  really  a  descendant  of  the  old  kings.  He  had 
never  thought  that  the  dwarves  would  actually  dare  to  approach  Smaug,  but 
believed  they were  frauds who would sooner or  later be discovered and be  turned 
out. He was wrong. Thorin, of  course, was  really  the grandson of  the King under 
the  Mountain,  and  there  is  no  knowing  what  a  dwarf  will  not  dare  and  do  for 
revenge or the recovery of his own. But the Master was not sorry at all to let them 
go.  They  were  expensive  to  keep,  and  their  arrival  had  turned  things  into  a  long 
holiday in which business was at a standstill. 
"Let them go and bother Smaug, and see how he welcomes them!" he thought. 
"Certainly,  O  Thorin  Thrain's  son  Thror's  son!"  was  what  he  said.  "You  must 
claim your own. The hour  is at hand, spoken of old. What help we can offer shall 
be yours, and we trust to your gratitude when your kingdom is regained." 
So  one  day,  although  autumn  was  now  getting  far  on,  and  winds  were  cold, 
and  leaves  were  falling  fast,  three  large  boats  left  Lake-town,  laden with  rowers, 

####-dwarves,  Mr.  Baggins,  and  many  provisions.  Horses  and  ponies  had  been  sent 
round  by  circuitous  paths  to  meet  them  at  their  appointed  landing-place.  The 
Master  and  his  councillors  bade  them  farewell  from  the  great  steps  of  the  town-
hall  that  went  down  to  the  lake.  People  sang  on  the  quays  and  out  of  windows. 
The  white  oars  dipped  and  splashed,  and  off  they  went  north  up  the  lake  on  the 
last stage of their long journey. The only person thoroughly unhappy was Bilbo. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 11</h4> <br> 

On the Doorstep 

 
In  two  days  going  they  rowed  right up  the Long Lake and passed out  into  the 
River  Running,  and  now  they  could  all  see  the  Lonely  Mountain  towering  grim 
and  tall  before  them.  The  stream was  strong  and  their  going  slow. At  the;  end  of 
the third day, some miles up the river, they drew in to the left or western bank and 
disembarked.  Here  they  were  joined  by  the  horses  with  other  provisions  and 
necessaries and the ponies for their own use that had been sent to meet them. They 
packed what  they  could  on  the  ponies  and  the  rest was made  into  a  store under  a 
tent,  but  none  of  the men  of  the  town would  stay with  them  even  for  the  night  so 
near the shadow of the Mountain. 
"Not  at  any  rate  until  the  songs  have  come  true!"  said  they.  It  was  easier  to 
believe in the Dragon and less easy to believe in Thorin in these wild parts. Indeed 
their stores had no need of any guard, for all  the  land was desolate and empty. So 
their escort  left  them, making off  swiftly down  the  river and  the  shoreward paths, 
although the night was already drawing on. 
They spent a cold and  lonely night and  their spirits  fell. The next day  they set 
out  again. Balin  and Bilbo  rode  behind,  each  leading  another  pony  heavily  laden 
beside  him;  the  others  were  some  way  ahead  picking  out  a  slow  road,  for  there 
were no paths. They made north-west, slanting away from the River Running, and 
drawing ever nearer and nearer to a great spur of the Mountain that was flung out 
southwards towards them. 
It was a weary journey, and a quiet and stealthy one. There was no laughter or 
song or sound of harps, and the pride and hopes which had stirred in their hearts at 
the  singing  of  old  songs  by  the  lake  died  away  to  a  plodding  gloom.  They  knew 
that they were drawing near to the end of their journey, and that it might be a very 
horrible end. The land about them grew bleak and barren, though once, as Thorin 
told  them,  it had been green and fair. There was  little grass, and before  long  there 
was neither bush nor tree, and only broken and blackened stumps to speak of ones 
long  vanished.  They  were  come  to  the  Desolation  of  the  Dragon,  and  they  were 
come at the waning of the year.  
 
They  reached  the  skirts  of  the  Mountain  all  the  same  without  meeting  any 
danger or any sign of the Dragon other than the wilderness he had made about his 
lair.  The Mountain  lay  dark  and  silent  before  them  and  ever  higher  above  them. 

####-They made  their  first  camp  on  the western  side  of  the  great  southern  spur, which 
ended  in  a  height  called Ravenhill. On  this  there  had  been  an  old watch-post; but 
they dared not climb it yet, it was too exposed. 
Before  setting  out  to  search  the western  spurs  of  the Mountain  for  the  hidden 
door, on which all their hopes rested, Thorin sent out a scouting expedition to spy 
out  the  land  to  the  South  where  the  Front  Gate  stood.  For  this  purpose  he  chose 
Balin  and Fili  and Kili,  and with  them went Bilbo. They marched under  the grey 
and silent cliffs to the feet of Ravenhill. There the river, after winding a wide loop 
over the valley of Dale, turned from the Mountain on its road to the Lake, flowing 
swift and noisily. Its bank was bare and rocky, tall and steep above the stream; and 
gazing  out  from  it  over  the  narrow  water,  foaming  and  splashing  among  many 
boulders,  they  could  see  in  the wide valley  shadowed by  the Mountain's  arms  the 
grey ruins of ancient houses, towers, and walls. 
"There  lies  all  that  is  left  of  Dale,"  said  Balin.  "The  mountain's  sides  were 
green with woods  and  all  the  sheltered  valley  rich  and  pleasant  in  the  days when 
the  bells  rang  in  that  town." He  looked  both  sad  and  grim  as  he  said  this: he had 
been one of Thorin's companions on the day the Dragon came. 
They did not dare to follow the river much further to. wards the Gate; but they 
went on beyond the end of the southern spur, until lying hidden behind a rock they 
could  look  out  and  see  the  dark  cavernous  opening  in  a  great  cliff-wall between 
the  arms  of  the Mountain. Out  of  it  the waters  of  the Running River  sprang;  and 
out  of  it  too  there  came  a  steam  and  a  dark  smoke. Nothing moved  in  the waste, 
save  the  vapour  and  the  water,  and  every  now  and  again  a  black  and  ominous 
crow. The only sound was  the sound of  the stony water, and every now and again 
the harsh croak of a bird. Balin shuddered. 
"Let us return!" he said. "We can do no good here!– And I don't like these dark 
birds, they look like spies of evil." 
"The dragon is still alive and in the halls under the Mountain then-or I imagine 
so from the smoke," said the hobbit. 
"That  does  not  prove  it,"  said Balin,  "though  I  don't  doubt  you  are  right. But 
he might be gone  away  some  time, or  he might be lying out on the mountain-side 
keeping watch, and still I expect smokes and steams would come out of the gates: 
all the halls within must be filled with his foul reek." 
 
With  such  gloomy  thoughts,  followed  ever  by  croaking  crows  above  them, 
they made  their weary way  back  to  the  camp. Only  in  June  they  had  been  guests 
in  the fair house of Elrond, and  though autumn was now crawling  towards winter 

####-that  pleasant  time  now  seemed  years  ago.  They were  alone  in  the  perilous waste 
without  hope  of  further  help. They were  at  the  end  of  their  journey,  but  as  far  as 
ever, it seemed, from the end of their quest. None of them had much spirit left. 
Now  strange  to  say  Mr.  Baggins  had  more  than  the  others.  He  would  often 
borrow Thorin's map  and  gaze  at  it,  pondering over  the  runes and  the message of 
the  moon-letters  Elrond  had  read.  It  was  he  that  made  the  dwarves  begin  the 
dangerous  search  on  the  western  slopes  for  the  secret  door.  They  moved  their 
camp  then  to  a  long  valley,  narrower  than  the  great  dale  in  the  South where  the 
Gates  of  the  river  stood,  and  walled  with  lower  spurs  of  the  Mountain.  Two  of 
these  here  thrust  forward west  from  the main mass  in  long  steep-sided ridges  that 
fell ever downwards towards the plain. On this western side there were fewer signs 
of  the  dragon's  marauding  feet,  and  there  was  some  grass  for  their  ponies.  From 
this western  camp,  shadowed  all day by  cliff  and wall until  the  sun began  to  sink 
towards  the  forest,  day  by  day  they  toiled  in  parties  searching  for  paths  up  the 
mountain-side. If the map was true, somewhere high above the cliff at the valley's 
head must stand the secret door. Day by day they came back to their camp without 
success. 
But at  last unexpectedly  they  found what  they were seeking. Fili and Kili and 
the  hobbit went  back one day down  the valley and scrambled among  the  tumbled 
rocks  at  its  southern  corner.  About  midday,  creeping  behind  a  great  stone  that 
stood  alone  like  a  pillar,  Bilbo  came  on  what  looked  like  rough  steps  going 
upwards.  Following  these  excitedly  he  and  the dwarves  found  traces of  a narrow 
track,  often  lost,  often  rediscovered,  that  wandered  on  to  the  top  of  the  southern 
ridge and brought them at last to a still narrower ledge, which turned north across 
the  face of  the Mountain. Looking down  they  saw  that they were at the top of the 
cliff  at  the  valley's  head  and  were  gazing  down  on  to  their  own  camp  below. 
Silently, clinging to the rocky wall on their right, they went in single file along the 
ledge,  till  the  wall  opened  and  they  turned  into  a  little  steep-walled  bay,  grassy-
floored,  still  and quiet.  Its  entrance which  they had  found  could not be  seen  from 
below because of  the overhang of  the  cliff, nor  from  further off because  it was  so 
small that it looked like a dark crack and no more. It was not a cave and was open 
to  the  sky  above;  but  at  its  inner  end  a  flat  wall  rose  up  that  in  the  lower  I  part, 
close  to  the  ground,  was  as  smooth  and  upright  as  mason's  work,  but  without  a 
joint or crevice to be seen. 
"No sign was  there of post or  lintel or  threshold, nor any sign of bar or bolt or 
key-hole; yet they did not doubt that they had found the door at last. 

####-They  beat  on  it,  they  thrust  and  pushed  at  it,  they  implored  it  to  move,  they 
spoke  fragments of broken  spells of opening, and nothing  stirred. At  last  tired out 
they.  rested  on  the  grass  at  its  feet,  and  then  at  evening  began,  their  long  climb 
down. 
 
There was excitement  in  the camp  that night.  In  the morning  they prepared  to 
move  once  more.  Only  Bofur  and  Bombur  were  left  behind  to  guard  the  ponies 
and  such  stores  as  they  had  brought  with  them  from  the  river.  The  others  went 
down  the  valley  and  up  the  newly  found  path,  and  so  to  the  narrow  ledge. Along 
this  they could carry no bundles or packs, so narrow and breathless was  it, with a 
fall  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  beside  them  on  to  sharp  rocks  below;  but  each  of 
them  took a good coil of  rope wound  tight about his waist, and  so at  last without 
mishap they reached the little grassy bay.  
There  they  made  their  third  camp,  hauling  up  what  they  needed  from  below 
with  their ropes. Down  the same way  they were able occasionally  to  lower one of 
the more  active  dwarves,  such  as Kili,  to  exchange  such  news  as  there was,  or  to 
take  a  share  in  the  guard  below,  while  Bofur  was  hauled  up  to  the  higher  camp. 
Bombur would not come up either the rope or the path. 
"I am too fat for such fly-walks," he said. "I should turn dizzy and tread on my 
beard, and then you would be thirteen again. And the knotted ropes are too slender 
for my weight." Luckily for him that was not true, as you will see. 
In  the  meanwhile  some  of  them  explored  the  ledge  beyond  the  opening  and 
found a path  that  led higher and higher on  to  the mountain; but  they did not dare 
to venture very  far  that way, nor was  there much use  in  it. Out up  there  a  silence 
reigned,  broken  by  no  bird  or  sound  except  that  of  the  wind  in  the  crannies  of 
stone. They spoke low and never called or sang, for danger brooded in every rock. 
The  others  who  were  busy  with  the  secret  of  the  door  had  no  more  success. 
They  were  too  eager  to  trouble  about  the  runes  or  the  moon-letters,  but  tried 
without  resting  to  discover where  exactly  in  the  smooth  face  of  the  rock  the  door 
was hidden. They had brought picks and tools of many sorts from Lake-town, and 
at  first  they  tried  to  use  these.  But  when  they  struck  the  stone  the  handles 
splintered and jarred their arms cruelly, and the steel heads broke or bent like lead. 
Mining work,  they  saw  clearly was  no  good  against  the magic  that  had  shut  this 
door; and they grew terrified, too, of the echoing noise. 
Bilbo  found  sitting  on  the  doorstep  lonesome  and  wearisome-there was  not  a 
doorstep, of course, really, but they used to call the little grassy space between the 
wall  and  the  opening  the  "doorstep"  in  fun,  remembering Bilbo's words  long  ago 

####-at  the  unexpected  party  in  his  hobbit-hole,  when  he  said  they  could  sit  on  the 
doorstep  till  they  thought  of  something.  And  sit  and  think  they  did,  or  wandered 
aimlessly about, and glummer and glummer they became. 
Their  spirits  had  risen  a  little  at  the  discovery  of  the path, but now  they  sank 
into their boots; and yet they would not give it up and go away. The hobbit was no 
longer much brighter than the dwarves. He would do nothing but sit with his back 
to  the  rock-face  and  stare  away west  through  the opening, over  the cliff, over  the 
wide  lands  to  the black wall of Mirkwood,  and  to  the distances beyond,  in which 
he  sometimes  thought  he  could  catch  glimpses  of  the Misty Mountains  small  and 
far. If the dwarves asked him what he was doing he answered: 
"You  said  sitting  on  the  doorstep  and  thinking  would  be  my  job,  not  to 
mention  getting  inside,  so  I  am  sitting  and  thinking." But  I  am  afraid  he was  not 
thinking  much  of  the  job,  but  of  what  lay  beyond  the  blue  distance,  the  quiet 
Western Land  and  the Hill  and  his  hobbit-hole under  it. A  large grey  stone  lay  in 
the centre of the grass and he stared moodily at it or watched the great snails. They 
seemed  to  love  the  little  shut-in  bay  with  its  walls  of  cool  rock,  and  there  were 
many of them of huge size crawling slowly and stickily along its sides. 
"Tomorrow begins the last week of Autumn," said Thorin one day.  
"And winter comes after autumn," said Bifur.  
"And  next  year  after  that,"  said  Dwalin,  "and  our  beards  will  grow  till  they 
hang  down  the  cliff  to  the  valley  before  anything  happens  here.  What  is  our 
burglar doing for us? 
Since  he  has  got  an  invisible  ring,  and  ought  to  be  a  specially  excellent 
performer  now,  I  am  beginning  to  think  he might  go  through  the  Front Gate  and 
spy things out a bit!" 
Bilbo  heard  this-the  dwarves  were  on  the  rocks  just  :  above  the  enclosure 
where  he  was  sitting-and  "Good Gracious!"  he  thought,  "so  that  is what  they  are 
beginning  to  think,  is  it?  It  is  always  poor  me  that  has  to  get  them  out  :  of  their 
difficulties, at least since the wizard left. Whatever am I going to do? I might have 
known  that  something  dreadful  would  happen  to  me  in  the  end.  I  don't  think  I 
could bear to see the unhappy valley of Dale again, and as for that steaming gate! 
! !" 
That  night  he  was  very  miserable  and  hardly  slept.  Next  day  the  dwarves  all 
went  wandering  off  in  various  directions;  some  were  exercising  the  ponies  down 
below,  some  were  roving  about  the  mountain-side. All day Bilbo  sat gloomily  in 
the  grassy  bay  gazing  at  the  stone,  or  out  west  through  the  narrow  opening. He 

####-had  a  queer  feeling  that  he  was  waiting  for  something.  "Perhaps  the  wizard  will 
suddenly come back today," he thought. 
If  he  lifted  his  head  he  could  see  a  glimpse  of  the  distant  forest.  As  the  sun 
turned west there was a gleam of yellow upon its far roof, as if the light caught the 
last pale  leaves. Soon he  saw  the orange ball of  the  sun  sinking  towards  the  level 
of his eyes. He went  to  the opening and  there pale and faint was a  thin new moon 
above  the  rim  of Earth. At  that  very moment  he  heard  a  sharp crack behind him. 
There on the grey stone in the grass was an enormous thrush, nearly coal black, its 
pale  yellow  breast  freckled  dark  spots.  Crack!  It  had  caught  a  snail  and  was 
knocking it on the stone. Crack! Crack! 
Suddenly  Bilbo  understood.  Forgetting  all  danger  he  stood  on  the  ledge  and 
hailed  the  dwarves,  shouting  and  paying. Those  that were  nearest  came  tumbling 
over the rocks and as fast as they could along the ledge to him, wondering what on 
earth  was  the  matter;  the  others  shouted  to  be  hauled  up  the  ropes  (except 
Bombur, of course: he was asleep). 
Quickly  Bilbo  explained.  They  all  fell  silent:  the  hobbit  standing  by  the  grey 
stone,  and  the  dwarves with wagging  beards watching  impatiently.  The  sun  sank 
lower  and  lower,  and  their  hopes  fell.  It  sank  into  a  belt  of  reddened  cloud  and 
disappeared.  The  dwarves  groaned,  but  still  Bilbo  stood  almost  without  moving. 
The  little  moon  was  dipping  to  the  horizon.  Evening  was  coming  on.  Then 
suddenly  when  their  hope  was  lowest  a  red  ray  of  the  sun  escaped  like  a  finger 
through  a  rent  in  the  cloud.  A  gleam  of  light  came  straight  through  the  opening 
into  the  bay  and  fell  on  the  smooth  rock-face.  The  old  thrush,  who  had  been 
watching from a high perch with beady eyes and head cocked on one side, gave a 
sudden  trill. There was a  loud attack. A  flake of  rock split  from  the wall and  fell. 
A  hole  appeared  suddenly  about  three  feet  from  the  ground.  Quickly,  trembling 
lest the chance should fade, the dwarves rushed to the rock and pushed-in vain. 
"The key! The key!" cried Bilbo. "Where is Thorin?" 
Thorin hurried up. 
"The key!" shouted Bilbo. "The key that went with the map! Try it now while 
there is still time!" 
Then Thorin stepped up and drew the key on its chain from round his neck. He 
put  it  to  the  hole.  It  fitted  and it turned! Snap! The gleam went out, the sun sank, 
the moon was gone, and evening sprang into the sky.  
Now  they  all  pushed  together,  and  slowly  a  part  of  the  rock-wall  gave  way. 
Long straight cracks appeared and widened. A door five feet high and three broad 
was  out-  lined,  and  slowly  without  a  sound  swung  inwards.  It  seemed  as  if 

####-darkness  flowed  out  like  a  vapour  from  the  hole  in  the  mountain-side,  and  deep 
darkness  in  which  nothing  could  be  seen  lay  before  their  eyes  mouth  leading  in 
and down. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 12</h4> <br> 

Inside Information 

 
For  a  long  time  the  dwarves  stood  in  the  dark  before  the  door  and  debated, 
until at last Thorin spoke: 
"Now  is  the  time  for  our  esteemed  Mr.  Baggins,  who  has  proved  himself  a 
good  companion  on  our  long  road,  and  a  hobbit  full  of  courage and  resource  far 
exceeding  his  size,  and  if  I may  say  so  possessed  of  good  luck  far  exceeding  the 
usual  allowance-now  is  the  time  for  him  to  perform  the  service  for which  he was 
included in our Company; now is the time for him to earn his Reward." 
You are  familiar with Thorin's style on  important occasions, so  I will not give 
you  any  more  of  it,  though  he  went  on  a  good  deal  longer  than  this.  It  certainly 
was an important occasion, but Bilbo felt impatient. By now he was quite familiar 
with Thorin too, and he knew what be was driving at. 
"If you mean you think it is my job to go into the secret passage first, O Thorin 
Thrain's son Oakenshield, may your beard grow ever longer," he said crossly, "say 
so  at  once  and  have  done!  I  might  refuse.  I  have  got  you  out  of  two  messes 
already,  which  were  hardly  in  the  original  bargain,  so  that  I  am,  I  think,  already 
owed  some  reward.  But  ‘third  time  pays  for  all'  as  my  father  used  to  say,  and 
somehow  I don't  think  I  shall  refuse. Perhaps  I have begun  to  trust my  luck more 
than I used to in the old days" – he meant last spring before he left his own house, 
but  it  seemed  centuries  ago  –  "but  anyway  I  think  I  will  go  and  have  a  peep  at 
once and get it over. Now who is coming with me?" 
He  did  not  expect  a  chorus  of  volunteers, so he was not disappointed. Fili and 
Kili  looked uncomfortable and stood on One  leg, but  the others made no pretence 
of offering  –  except  old Balin.  the  look-out man, who was  rather  fond  the hobbit. 
He  said  he would  come  inside  at  least  and  perhaps  a bit of  the way  too,  really  to 
call for help if necessary.  
The most  that  can  be  said  for  the  dwarves  is  this:  they  intended  to  pay  Bilbo 
really  handsomely  for  his  services;  they  had  brought  him  to  do  a  nasty  job  for 
them,  and  they  did  not  mind  the  poor  little  fellow  doing  it  if  he  would;  but  they 
would  all  have  done  their  best  to  get  him  out  of  trouble,  if  he  got  into  it,  as  they 
did in the case of the trolls at the beginning of their adventures before they had any 
particular  reasons  for  being  grateful  to  him.  There  it  is:  dwarves  are  not  heroes, 
but  calculating  folk with  a great  idea of  the value of money;  some  are  tricky  and 

####-treacherous  and  pretty  bad  lots;  some  are  not,  but  are  decent  enough  people  like 
Thorin and Company, if you don't expect too much. 
 
The  stars  were  coming  out  behind  him  in  a  pale  sky  barred  with  black  when 
the hobbit crept through the enchanted door and stole into the Mountain. It was far 
easier going  than he  expected. This was no goblin  entrance, or  rough wood-elves' 
cave.  It  was  a  passage  made  by  dwarves,  at  the  height  of  their  wealth  and  skill: 
straight  as  a  ruler,  smooth-floored  and  smooth-sided,  going  with  a  gentle  never-
varying slope direct-to some distant end in the blackness below.  
After a while Balin bade Bilbo "Good  luck!" and  stopped where he could still 
see the faint outline of the door, and by a trick of, the echoes of the tunnel hear the 
rustle  of  the whispering  voices  of  the  others  just  outside. Then  the  hobbit  slipped 
on  his  ring,  and warned  by  the  echoes  to  take more  than hobbit's care to make no 
sound,  he  crept  noiselessly  down,  down,  down  into  the  dark.  He  was  trembling 
with  fear,  but  his  little  face  was  set  and  grim.  Already  he  was  a  very  different 
hobbit from the one that had run out without a pocket-handkerchief from Bag-End 
long  ago. He had not had  a pocket-handkerchief for ages. He loosened his dagger 
in its sheath, tightened his belt, and went on. 
 
"Now  you  are  in  for  it  at  last, Bilbo Baggins,"  he  said  to  himself.  "You went 
and put your foot right in it that night of the party, and now you have got to pull it 
out and pay for it! Dear me, what a fool I was and am!" said the least Tookish part 
of  him.  "I  have  absolutely  no  use  for  dragon-guarded treasures, and the whole lot 
could  stay  here  for  ever,  if  only  I  could wake up and  find  this beastly  tunnel was 
my own front-hall at home!" 
He did not wake up of course, but went still on and on, till all sign of the door 
behind  had  faded  away.  He  was  altogether  alone.  Soon  he  thought  it  was 
beginning to feel warm. "Is that a kind of a glow I seem to see coming right ahead 
down  there?"  he  thought.  It was. As  he went  forward  it  grew  and  grew,  till  there 
was no doubt about it. It was a red light steadily getting redder and redder. Also it 
was  now  undoubtedly  hot  in  the  tunnel. Wisps of vapour  floated up and past him 
and he began to sweat. A sound, too, began to throb in his ears, a sort of bubbling 
like  the  noise  of  a  large  pot  galloping  on  the  fire,  mixed  with  a  rumble  as  of  a 
gigantic  tom-cat  purring.  This  grew  to  the  unmistakable  gurgling  noise  of  some 
vast animal snoring in its sleep down there in the red glow in front of him. 
  It  was  at  this  point  that  Bilbo  stopped.  Going  on  from  there  was  the  bravest 
thing he ever did. The tremendous things that happened afterward were as nothing 

####-compared  to  it.  He  fought  the  real  battle  in  the  tunnel  alone,  before  he  ever  saw 
the vast danger that lay in wait. At any rate after a short halt go on he did; and you 
can picture him coming to the end of the tunnel, an opening of much the same size 
and shape as the door above. Through it peeps the hobbit's little head. Before him 
lies the great bottommost cellar or dungeon-hall of the ancient dwarves right at the 
Mountain's  root.  It  is  almost  dark  so  that  its  vastaess  can  only  be  dimly  guessed, 
but  rising  from  the near side of  the  rocky  floor  there  is a great glow. The glow of 
Smaug! 
 
There  he  lay,  a  vast  red-golden dragon, fast asleep;  thrumming came from his 
jaws and nostrils, and wisps of smoke, but his  fires were  low  in slumber. Beneath 
him,  under  all  his  limbs  and  his  huge  coiled  tail,  and  about  him  on  all  sides 
stretching  away  across  the  unseen  floors,  lay  countless  piles  of  precious  things, 
gold wrought and unwrought, gems and jewels, and silver red-stained in the ruddy 
light. 
Smaug  lay, with wings  folded  like  an  immeasurable bat,  turned partly on one 
side,  so  that  the  hobbit  could  see  his  underparts  and  his  long  pale  belly  crusted 
with  gems  and  fragments  of  gold  from  his  long  lying  on  his  costly  bed.  Behind 
him  where  the  walls  were  nearest  could  dimly  be  seen  coats  of  mail,  helms  and 
axes,  swords  and  spears  hanging;  and  there  in  rows  stood  great  jars  and  vessels 
filled with a wealth that could not be guessed. To say that Bilbo's breath was taken 
away  is  no  description  at  all.  There  are  no words  left  to express his  staggerment, 
since Men changed the language that they learned of elves in the days when all the 
world was wonderful.  Bilbo  had  heard  tell  and  sing  of  dragon-hoards before, but 
the splendour, the lust, the glory of such treasure had never yet come home to him. 
His heart was filled and pierced with enchantment and with the desire of dwarves; 
and  he  gazed  motionless,  almost  forgetting  the  frightful  guardian,  at  the  gold 
beyond price and count. 
 
He  gazed  for  what  seemed  an  age,  before  drawn  almost  against  his  will,  he 
stole  from  the  shadow  of  the  doorway,  across  the  floor  to  the  nearest  edge  of  the 
mounds of treasure. Above him the sleeping dragon lay, a dire menace even in his 
sleep.  He  grasped  a  great  two-handled  cup,  as  heavy  as  he  could  carry,  and  cast 
one  fearful  eye  upwards. Smaug  stirred  a wing,  opened  a  claw,  the  rumble  of  his 
snoring changed its note. 
Then  Bilbo  fled.  But  the  dragon  did  not  wake-not  yet  but  shifted  into  other 
dreams  of  greed  and  violence,  lying  there  in  his  stolen  hall while  the  little hobbit 

####-toiled back up  the  long  tunnel. His heart was beating and a more  fevered shaking 
was in his legs than when he was going down, but still he clutched the cup, and his 
chief  thought was:  "I've  done  it! This will  show  them.  'More  like  a grocer  than  a 
burglar' indeed! Well, we'll hear no more of that." 
Nor did he. Balin was overjoyed to see the hobbit again, and as delighted as he 
was  surprised.  He  picked  Bilbo  up  and  carried  him  out  into  the  open  air.  It  was 
midnight  and  clouds  had  covered  the  stars,  but  Bilbo  lay  with  his  eyes  shut, 
gasping  and  taking pleasure  in  the  feel of  the  fresh  air  again,  and hardly noticing 
the  excitement  of  the  dwarves,  or  how  they  praised  him  and  patted  him  on  the 
back  and  put  themselves  and  all  their  families  for  generations  to  come  at  his 
service. 
 
The  dwarves  were  still  passing  the  cup  from  hand  to  hand  and  talking 
delightedly of the recovery of their treasure, when suddenly a vast rumbling woke 
in  the mountain underneath as  if  it was an old volcano  that had made up its mind 
to  start  eruptions  once  again.  The  door  behind  them  was  pulled  nearly  to,  and 
blocked  from  closing  with  a  stone,  but  up  the  long  tunnel  came  the  dreadful 
echoes, from far down in the depths, of a bellowing and a trampling that made the 
ground beneath them tremble. 
Then  the  dwarves  forgot  their  joy  and  their  confident  boasts  of  a  moment 
before  and  cowered  down  in  fright.  Smaug was  still  to  be  reckoned with.  It  does 
not  do  to  leave  a  live  dragon  out  of  your  calculations,  if  you  live  near  him. 
Dragons may  not  have much  real  use  for  all  their wealth,  but  they  know  it  to  an 
ounce as a rule, especially after long possession; and Smaug was no exception. He 
had  passed  from  an  uneasy  dream  (in which  a warrior,  altogether  insignificant  in 
size  but  provided  with  a  bitter  sword  and  great  courage,  figured  most 
unpleasantly)  to  a  doze,  and  from  a  doze  to wide waking.  There was  a  breath  of 
strange  air  in  his  cave.  Could  there  be  a  draught  from  that  little  hole?  He  had 
never  felt  quite  happy  about  it,  though  was  so  small,  and  now  he  glared  at  it  in 
suspicion an wondered why he had never blocked it up. Of late he had half fancied 
he had caught the dim echoes of a knocking sound from far above that came down 
through  it  to  his  lair.  He  stirred  and  stretched  forth  his  neck  to  sniff.  Then  he 
missed the cup!                                       
Thieves!  Fire! Murder!  Such  a  thing  had  not  happened  since  first  he  came  to 
the Mountain! His rage passes description – the sort of rage that is only seen when 
rich  folk  that  have  more  than  they  can  enjoy  suddenly  lose  something  that  they 
have  long  had  but  have  never  before  used  or  wanted.  His  fire  belched  forth,  the 

####-hall  smoked,  he  shook  the mountain-roots. He  thrust his head  in vain  at  the  little 
hole,  and  then  coiling  his  length  together,  roaring  like  thunder  underground,  he 
sped  from  his  deep  lair  through  its  great  door,  out  into  the  huge  passages  of  the 
mountain-palace and up towards the Front Gate. 
To  hunt  the  whole  mountain  till  he  had  caught  the  thief  and  had  torn  and 
trampled  him  was  his  one  thought.  He  issued  from  the  Gate,  the  waters  rose  in 
fierce  whistling  steam,  and  up  he  soared  blazing  into  the  air  and  settled  on  the 
mountain-top  in  a  spout of green  and  scarlet  flame. The dwarves heard  the  awful 
rumour  of  his  flight,  and  they  crouched  against  the  walls  of  the  grassy  terrace 
cringing  under  boulders,  hoping  somehow  to  escape  the  frightful  eyes  of  the 
hunting dragon. 
There they would have all been killed, if it had not been for Bilbo once again. 
"Quick! Quick!" he gasped. "The door! The tunnel! It's no good here." 
Roused  by  these  words  they  were  just  about  to  creep  inside  the  tunnel  when 
Bifur gave a cry: "My cousins! Bombur and Bofur – we have forgotten them, they 
are down in the valley!" 
"They will be slain, and all our ponies too, and all out stores lost," moaned the 
others. "We can do nothing." 
"Nonsense!"  said  Thorin,  recovering  his  dignity.  "We  cannot  leave  them.  Get 
inside Mr. Baggins and Balin, and you two Fili and Kili-the dragon shan't have all 
of us. Now you others, where are the ropes? Be quick!" 
Those  were  perhaps  the  worst  moments  they  had  been  through  yet.  The 
horrible sounds of Smaug's anger were echoing  in  the stony hollows  far above; at 
any  moment  he  might  come  blazing  down  or  fly  whirling  round  and  find  them 
there,  near  the  perilous  cliff's  edge  hauling  madly  on  the  ropes.  Up  came  Bofur, 
and  still  all  was  safe.  Up  came  Bombur,  puffing  and  blowing  while  the  ropes 
creaked, and still all was safe. Up came some tools and bundles of stores, and then 
danger was upon them. A whirring noise was heard. A red light touched the points 
of  standing  rocks.  The  dragon  came.  They  had  barely  time  to  fly  back  to  the 
tunnel, pulling and dragging in their bundles, when Smaug came hurtling from the 
North, licking the mountain-sides with flame, beating his great wings with a noise 
like a roaring wind. His hot breath shrivelled  the grass before  the door, and drove 
in  through  the  crack  they  had  left  and  scorched  them  as  they  lay  hid.  Flickering 
fires  leaped  up  and  black  rock-shadows  danced.  Then  darkness  fell  as  he  passed 
again. 
The ponies screamed with terror, burst their ropes and galloped wildly off. The 
dragon swooped and turned to pursue them, and was gone. 

####-"That'll be the end of our poor beasts!" said Thorin. 
"Nothing  can  escape  Smaug  once  he  sees  it.  Here  we  are  and  here  we  shall 
have to stay, unless any one fancies tramping the long open miles back to the river 
with Smaug on the watch!" 
It  was  not  a  pleasant  thought!  They  crept  further  down  the  tunnel,  and  there 
they  lay  and  shivered  though  it  was  warm  and  stuffy,  until  dawn  came  pale 
through  the  crack  of  the  door. Every  now  and  again  through  the  night  they  could 
hear the roar of the flying dragon grow and then pass and fade, as he hunted round 
and round the mountain-sides. 
He  guessed  from  the  ponies,  and  from  the  traces  of  the  camps  he  had 
discovered,  that men had  come up  from  the  river  and  the  lake  and had  scaled  the 
mountain-side  from  the  valley  where  the  ponies  had  been  standing;  but  the  door 
withstood his searching eye, and the little high-walled bay had kept out his fiercest 
flames.  Long  he  had  hunted  in  vain  till  the  dawn  chilled  his  wrath  and  he  went 
back to his golden couch to sleep – and to gather new strength. 
He would not  forget or  forgive  the  theft, not  if a  thousand years turned him to 
smouldering  stone,  but  he  could  afford  to  wait.  Slow  and  silent  he  crept  back  to 
his lair and half closed his eyes. 
When  morning  came  the  terror  of  the  dwarves  grew  less.  They  realized  that 
dangers  of  this  kind  were  inevitable  in  dealing  with  such  a  guardian,  and  that  it 
was  no  good  giving  up  their  quest  yet.  Nor  could  they  get  away  just  now,  as 
Thorin  had  pointed  out. Their  ponies were  lost  or  killed,  and  they would  have  to 
wait  some  time  before  Smaug  relaxed  his  watch  sufficiently  for  them  to dare  the 
long way on  foot. Luckily  they had  saved  enough of  their  stores  to  last  them  still 
for some time. 
They debated  long on what was  to be done, but  they could  think of no way of 
getting  rid  of  Smaug  –  which  had  always  been  a  weak  point  in  their  plans,  as 
Bilbo  felt  inclined  to  point  out.  Then  as  is  the  nature  of  folk  that  are  thoroughly 
perplexed,  they began  to grumble at  the hobbit, blaming him  for what had at  first 
so pleased them: for bringing away a cup and stirring up Smaug's wrath so soon. 
"What else do you suppose a burglar is to do?" asked Bilbo angrily. "I was not 
engaged  to  kill  dragons,  that  is  warrior's  work,  but  to  steal  treasure.  I  made  the 
best  beginning  I  could.  Did  you  expect  me  to  trot  back  with  the  whole  hoard  of 
Thror  on  my  back?  If  there  is  any  grumbling  to  be  done,  I  think  I  might  have  a 
say. You ought to have brought five hundred burglars not one. I am sure it reflects 
great  credit  on  your  grandfather,  but  you  cannot  pretend  that  you  ever  made  the 

####-vast  extent  of  his  wealth  clear  to me.  I  should want  hundreds  of  years  to  bring  it 
all up, if I was fifty times as big, and Smaug as tame as a rabbit." 
After that of course the dwarves begged his pardon. 
"What  then  do  you  propose  we  should  do,  Mr.  Baggins?"  asked  Thorin 
politely.  
"I  have  no  idea  at  the  moment  –  if  you  mean  about  removing  the  treasure. 
That  obviously  depends  entirely  on  some  new  turn  of  luck  and  the  getting  rid  of 
Smaug. 
Getting  rid  of  dragons  is  not  at  all  in  my  line,  but  I  will  do  my  best  to  think 
about it. Personally I have no hopes at all, and wish I was safe back at home." 
"Never mind that for the moment! What are we to do now,  to-day?" 
"Well,  if  you  really want my  advice,  I  should  say we  can  do  nothing  but  stay 
where  we  are.  By  day  we  can  no  doubt  creep  out  safely  enough  to  take  the  air. 
Perhaps before long one or two could be chosen to go back to the store by the river 
and replenish our supplies. But in the meanwhile everyone ought to be well inside 
the tunnel by night. 
"Now  I  will  make  you  an  offer.  I  have  got my  ring  and will  creep  down  this 
very  noon-then  if  ever  Smaug  ought  to  be  napping-and  see  what  he  is  up  to. 
Perhaps something will turn up. 'Every worm has his weak spot,' as my father used 
to say, though I am sure it was not from personal experience." 
Naturally  the  dwarves  accepted  the  offer  eagerly.  Already  they  had  come  to 
respect little Bilbo. Now he had become the real leader in their adventure. He had 
begun  to  have  ideas  and  plans  of  his  own. When  midday  came  he  got  ready  for 
another  journey  down  into  the Mountain. He  did  not  like  it  of  course,  but  it was 
not  so  bad  now  he  knew, more  or  less, what was  in  front  of  him. Had  he  known 
more about dragons and  their wily ways, he might have  teen more  frightened and 
less hopeful of catching this one napping. 
The sun was shining when he started, but it was as dark as night in the tunnel. 
The light from the door, almost closed, soon faded as he went down. So silent was 
his going  that smoke on a gentle wind could hardly have surpasses  it, and he was 
inclined  to  feel  a  bit  proud  of  himself  as  he  drew  near  the  lower  door. There was 
only the very fainter glow to be seen. 
"Old Smaug  is weary and asleep," he  thought.  "He can't,  see me and he won't 
hear  me.  Cheer  up  Bilbo!"  He  had  forgotten  or  had  never  heard  about  dragons' 
sense of smell. 
It is also an awkward fact that they keep half an eye open watching while they 
sleep,  if  they are  suspicious. Smaug certainly  looked  fast asleep, almost dead and 

####-dark, with scarcely a snore more than a whiff of unseen steam, when Bilbo peeped 
once more from the entrance. He was just about to step out on to the floor when he 
caught  a  sudden  thin  and  piercing  ray  of  red  from  under  the  drooping  lid.  of 
Smaug's  left  eye.  He  was  only  pretending  to  sleep!  He  was  watching  the  tunnel 
entrance!  Hurriedly  Bilbo  stepped  back  and  blessed  the  luck  of  his  ring.  Then 
Smaug spoke. 
 
"Well,  thief!  I  smell  you  and  I  feel  your  air.  I  hear  your  breath. Come  along! 
Help yourself again, there is plenty and to spare!" 
But Bilbo was  not  quite  so  unlearned  in  dragon-lore as all  that, and  if Smaug 
hoped to get him to come nearer so easily he was disappointed. 
"No  thank  you,  O  Smaug  the.  Tremendous!"  he  replied.  "I  did  not  come  for 
presents. I only wished  to have a  look at you and see  if you were  truly as great as 
tales say. I did not believe them." 
"Do  you  now?"  said  the  dragon  somewhat  flattered,  even  though  he  did  not 
believe a word of it.                   j 
"Truly  songs  and  tales  fall  utterly  short  of  the  reality,  O  Smaug  the  Chiefest 
and Greatest of Calamities," replied Bilbo.                                               I 
You  have  nice  manners  for  a  thief  and  a  liar,"  said  the  dragon.  "You  seem 
familiar with my  name,  but  I  don't  seem  to  remember  smelling  you  before. Who 
are you and where do you come from, may I ask?" 
"You  may  indeed!  I  come  from  under  the  hill,  and  under  hills  and  over  the 
hills my paths led. And through the air, I am he that walks unseen." 
"So I can well believe," said Smaug, "but that is hardly our usual name." 
"I am  the clue-finder, the web-cutter, the stinging fly. I as chosen for the lucky 
number." 
"Lovely  titles!"  sneered  the  dragon.  "But  lucky  numbers  don't  always  come 
off." 
"I  am  he  that  buries  his  friends  alive  and  drowns  them  and  draws  them  alive 
again from the water. I came from the end of a bag, but no bag went over me." 
"These don't sound so creditable," scoffed Smaug. 
"I  am  the  friend  of  bears  and  the  guest  of  eagles.  I  am  Ringwinner  and 
Luckwearer;  and  I  am  Barrel-rider," went  on Bilbo  beginning  to  be  pleased with 
his riddling. 
"That's  better!"  said  Smaug.  "But  don't  let  your  imagination  run  away  with 
you!" 
 

####-This  of  course  is  the way  to  talk  to  dragons,  if  you  don't want  to  reveal  your 
proper  name  (which  is  wise),  and  don't  want  to  infuriate  them  by  a  flat  refusal 
(which is also very wise). No dragon can resist the fascination of riddling talk and 
of wasting time trying to understand it. There was a lot here which Smaug did not 
understand  at  all  (though  I  expect  you  do,  since  you  know  all  about  Bilbo's 
adventures  to which  he was  referring), but he  thought he understood enough, and 
he chuckled in his wicked inside. 
"I  thought so  last night," he smiled  to himself. "Lake-men, some nasty scheme 
of those miserable tub-trading Lake-men, or I'm a lizard. I haven't been down that 
way for an age and an age; but I will soon alter that!" 
"Very  well,  O  Barrel-rider!"  he  said  aloud.  "Maybe  Barrel  was  your  pony's 
name;  and maybe  not,  though  it was  fat  enough. You may walk  unseen,  but  you 
did  not  walk  all  the  way.  Let  me  tell  you  I  ate  six  ponies  last  night  and  I  shall 
catch and eat all the others before long. In return for the excellent meal I will give 
you  one  piece  of  advice  for  your  good:  don't  have more  to  do with  dwarves  than 
you can help!" 
"Dwarves!" said Bilbo in pretended surprise. 
"Don't talk to me!" said Smaug. "I know the smell (and taste) of dwarf-no one 
better.  Don't  tell  me  that  I  can  eat  a  dwarf-ridden  pony  and  not  know  it!  You'll 
come  to  a  bad  end,  if  you  go with  such  friends. Thief Barrel-rider. I don't mind if 
you go back and tell them so from me." 
But he did not tell Bilbo that there was one smell he could not make out at all, 
hobbit-smell; it was quite outside his experience and puzzled him mightily.  
"I  suppose  you  got  a  fair  price  for  that  cup  last  night?"  he  went  on.  "Come 
now,  did  you? Nothing  at  all! Well,  that's  just  like  them. And  I  suppose  they  are 
skulking  outside,  and  your  job  is  to  do  all  the  dangerous work  and  get what  you 
can  when  I'm  not  looking-for  them?  And  you  will  get  a  fair  share?  Don't  you 
believe it! If you get off alive, you will be lucky." 
 
Bilbo  was  now  beginning  to  feel  really  uncomfortable.  Whenever  Smaug's 
roving  eye,  seeking  for  him  in  the  shadows,  flashed  across  him,  he  trembled,  and 
an unaccountable desire seized hold of him to rush out and reveal himself and tell 
all  the  truth  to  Smaug.  In  fact  he  was  in  grievous  danger  of  coming  under  the 
dragon-spell. But plucking up courage he spoke again. 
"You  don't  know  everything, O  Smaug  the Mighty,"  said  he.  "Not  gold  alone 
brought us hither." 

####-"Ha! Ha! You  admit  the  'us',"  laughed Smaug. "Why not say  'us fourteen' and 
be  done  with  it.  Mr.  Lucky  Number?  I  am  pleased  to  hear  that  you  had  other 
business  in  these  parts  besides  my  gold.  In  that  case  you  may,  perhaps,  not 
altogether waste your time. 
"I don't know if it has occurred to you that, even if you could steal the gold bit 
by bit-a matter of a hundred years or so – you could not get it very far? Not much 
use  on  the  mountain-side? Not much use  in  the  forest? Bless me! Had you never 
thought  of  the  catch?  A  fourteenth  share,  I  suppose,  Or  something  like  it,  those 
were  the  terms,  eh?  But  what  about  delivery? What  about  cartage? What  about 
armed guards and tolls?" And Smaug laughed aloud. He had a wicked and a wily 
heart,  and  he  knew  his  guesses  were  not  far  out,  though  he  suspected  that  the 
Lake-men were at the back of the plans, and that most of the plunder was meant to 
stop  there  in  the  town  by  the  shore  that  in  his  young  days  had  been  called 
Esgaroth. 
You will hardly believe  it, but poor Bilbo was  really very  taken aback. So far 
all  his.  thoughts  and  energies  had  been  concentrated  on  getting  to  the  Mountain 
and  finding  the  entrance. He  had  never  bothered  to wonder  how  the  treasure was 
to be removed, certainly never how any part of it that might fall to his share was to 
be brought back all the way to Bag-End Under-Hill. 
Now  a  nasty  suspicion  began  to  grow  in  his  mind-had  the  dwarves  forgotten 
this important point too, or were they laughing in their sleeves at him all the time? 
That  is  the effect  that dragon-talk has on the inexperienced. Bilbo of course ought 
to have been on his guard; but Smaug had rather an overwhelming personality.  
"I  tell you," he  said,  in  an  effort  to  remain  loyal  to his  friends  and  to keep his 
end up, "that gold was only an afterthought with  us. We came over hill and under 
hill,  by  wave  and  win,  for  Revenge.  Surely, O  Smaug  the  unassessably wealthy, 
you must realize that your success has made you some bitter enemies?" 
Then  Smaug  really  did  laugh-a  devastating  sound  which  shook  Bilbo  to  the 
floor, while  far  up  in  the  tunnel  the  dwarves  huddled  together  and  imagined  that 
the hobbit had come to a sudden and a nasty end. 
"Revenge!"  he  snorted,  and  the  light  of  his  eyes  lit  the  the  hall  from  floor  to 
ceiling like scarlet lightning. "Revenge! The King under the Mountain is dead and 
where are hi kin  that dare  seek  revenge? Girion Lord of Dale  is dead, and  I have 
eaten  his  people  like  a wolf  among  sheep,  and where  are  his  sons'  sons  that  dare 
approach me?  I  kill where  I wish  and  none  dare  resist.  I  laid  low  the warriors of 
old and their like is not in the world today. Then I was but young and tender. Now 
I  am  old  and  strong,  strong  strong.  Thief  in  the  Shadows!"  he  gloated.  "My 

####-armour  is  like  tenfold shields, my  teeth are swords, my claws spears,  the shock of 
my tail a thunderbolt, my wings a hurricane, and my breath death!" 
"I  have  always  understood,"  said  Bilbo  in  a  frightened  squeak,  "that  dragons 
were softer underneath, especially in the region of the–er–chest; but doubtless one 
so fortified has thought of that." 
The dragon stopped short in his boasting. "Your information is antiquated," he 
snapped.  "I  am  armoured  above  and  below  with  iron  scales  and  hard  gems.  No 
blade can pierce me." 
"I might  have  guessed  it,"  said Bilbo.  "Truly  there  can;  nowhere  be found the 
equal of Lord Smaug the Impenetrable. What magnificence to possess a waistcoat 
of fine diamonds!" 
"Yes,  it  is  rare  and wonderful,  indeed,"  said  Smaug  absurdly  pleased. He  did 
not  know  that  the  hobbit  had  already  caught  a  glimpse  of  his  peculiar  under-
covering on his previous visit, and was itching for a closer view for reasons of his 
own. The dragon rolled over. "Look!" he said. "What do you say to that?" 
"Dazzlingly  marvellous!  Perfect!  Flawless!  Staggering!"  exclaimed  Bilbo 
aloud, but what he thought inside was: "Old fool! Why there is a large patch in the 
hollow of his left breast as bare as a snail out of its shell!" 
After  he  had  seen  that Mr. Baggins'  one  idea was  to  get  away.  "Well,  I  really 
must not detain Your Magnificence any longer," he  said, "or keep you from much 
needed  rest.  Ponies  take  some  catching,  I  believe,  after  a  long  start.  And  so  do 
burglars," he added as a parting shot, as he darted back and fled up the tunnel. 
It was an unfortunate remark, for  the dragon spouted  terrific flames after him, 
and  fast  though  he  sped  up  the  slope,  he  had  not  gone  nearly  far  enough  to  be 
comfortable  before  the  ghastly  head  of  Smaug  was  thrust  against  the  opening 
behind.  Luckily  the  whole  head  and  jaws  could  not  squeeze  in,  but  the  nostrils 
sent  forth  fire  and  vapour  to  pursue  him,  and  he  was  nearly  overcome,  and 
stumbled blindly on in great pain and fear. He had been feeling rather pleased with 
the  cleverness  of  his  conversation  with  Smaug,  but  his  mistake  at  the  end  shook 
him into better sense. 
"Never  laugh  at  live  dragons,  Bilbo  you  fool!"  he  said  to  himself,  and  it 
became  a  favourite  saying  of  his  later,  and  passed  into  a  proverb.  "You  aren't 
nearly through this adventure yet," he added, and that was pretty true as well. 
 
The afternoon was turning into evening when he came out again and stumbled 
and  fell  in  a  faint  on  the  'door-step.'  The  dwarves  revived  him,  and  doctored  his 
scorches  as well  as  they  could; but  it was  a  long  time before  the hair on  the back 

####-of  his  head  and  his  heels  grew  properly  again:  it had  all been  singed  and  frizzled 
right down to the skin. In the meanwhile his friends did their best to cheer him up; 
and they were eager for his story, especially wanting to know why the dragon had 
made such an awful noise, and how Bilbo had escaped. 
But  the  hobbit  was  worried  and  uncomfortable,  and  they  had  difficulty  in 
getting anything out of him. On  thinking  things over he was now  regretting  some 
of the things he had said to the dragon, and was not eager to repeat them. The old 
thrush was sitting on a rock near by with his head cocked on one side, listening to 
all  that was  said.  It  shows what  an  ill  temper Bilbo was  in:  he  picked  up  a  stone 
and threw it at the thrush, which merely fluttered aside and came back. 
"Drat  the  bird!"  said  Bilbo  crossly.  "I  believe  he  is  listening,  and  I  don't  like 
the look of him." 
"Leave  him  alone!"  said Thorin.  "The  thrushes  are  good  and  friendly-this is a 
very  old  bird  indeed,  and  is  maybe  the  last  left  of  the  ancient  breed  that  used  to 
live about here, tame to the hands of my father and grandfather. They were a long-
lived and magical race, and this might even be one of those that were alive then, a 
couple of hundreds years or more ago. The Men of Dale used  to have  the  trick of 
understanding  their  language,  and  used  them  for messengers  to  fly  to  the Men of 
the Lake and elsewhere." 
"Well, he'll have news to take to Lake-town all right, if that is what he is after," 
said Bilbo; "though I don't suppose there are any people left there that trouble with 
thrush-language." 
"Why what has happened?" cried the dwarves. "Do get on with your tale!" 
So  Bilbo  told  them  all  he  could  remember,  and  he  confessed  that  he  had  a 
nasty  feeling  that  the  dragon  guessed  too  much  from  his  riddles  added  to  the 
camps  and  the  ponies.  "I  am  sure  he  knows  we  came  from  Lake-town  and  had 
help  from  there;  and  I  have  a  horrible  feeling  that  his  next  move  may  be  in  that 
direction.  I  wish  to  goodness  I  had  never  said  that  about  Barrel-rider;  it  would 
make even a blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake-men." 
"Well,  well!  It  cannot  be  helped,  and  it  is  difficult  not  to  slip  in  talking  to  a 
dragon,  or  so  I  have  always  heard,"  said  Balin  anxious  to  comfort  him.  "I  think 
you  did  very well,  if  you  ask me-you found out one very useful thing at any rate, 
and got home alive, and  that  is more  than most can say who have had words with 
the likes of Smaug. It may be a mercy and a blessing yet to know of the bare patch 
in the old Worm's diamond waistcoat." 
That  turned  the  conversation,  and  they  all  began  discussing  dragon-slayings 
historical,  dubious,  and  mythical,  and  the  various  sorts  of  stabs  and  jabs  and 

####-undercuts,  and  the  different  arts,  devices  and  stratagems  by which  they  had  been 
accomplished. The general opinion was that catching a dragon napping was not as 
easy as it sounded, and the attempt to stick one or prod one asleep was more likely 
to  end  in  disaster  than  a  bold  frontal  attack.  All  the  while  they  talked  the  thrush 
listened,  till  at  last when  the  stars  began  to  peep  forth,  it  silently  spread  its wings 
and  flew  away.  And  all  the  while  they  talked  and  the  shadows  lengthened  Bilbo 
became more and more unhappy and his foreboding 
At last he interrupted them. "I am sure we are very unsafe here," he said, "and 
I don't see the point of sitting here. The dragon has withered all the pleasant green, 
and  anyway  the  night  has  come  and  it  is  cold.  But  I  feel  it  in my  bones  that  this 
place will be attacked again. Smaug knows now how I came down to his hall, and 
you  can  trust  him  to  guess where  the  other  end  of  the  tunnel  is. He will break all 
this  side  of  the Mountain  to  bits,  if  necessary,  to  stop  up  our  entrance,  and  if  we 
are smashed with it the better he will like it." 
"You  are  very  gloomy,  Mr.  Baggins!"  said  Thorin.  "Why  has  not  Smaug 
blocked  the  lower  end,  then,  if  he  is  so  eager  to  keep  us  out?  He  has  not,  or  we 
should have heard him." 
"I  don't  know,  I  don't  know-because  at  first  he  wanted  to  try  and  lure  me  in 
again, I suppose, and now perhaps because he is waiting till after tonight's hunt, or 
because he does not want to damage his bedroom if he can help it – but I wish you 
would not argue. Smaug will be coming out at any minute now, and our only hope 
is to get well in the tunnel and shut the door." 
He  seemed  so much  in  earnest  that  the  dwarves  at  last  did  as  he said,  though 
they  delayed  shutting  the  door-it  seemed  a  desperate  plan,  for  no  one  knew 
whether  or  how  they  could  get  it  open  again  from  the  inside,  and  the  thought  of 
being  shut  in  a  place  from  which  the  only  way  out  led  through  the  dragon's  lair 
was  not  one  they  liked.  Also  everything  seemed  quite  quiet,  both  outside  and 
down the tunnel. So for a longish while they sat inside not far down from the half-
open  door  and  went  on  talking.  The  talk  turned  to  the  dragon's  wicked  words 
about the dwarves. Bilbo wished he had never heard them, or at least that he could 
feel quite certain that the dwarves now were absolutely honest when they declared 
that they had never thought at all about what would happen after the treasure had 
been won.  
"We  knew  it  would  be  a  desperate  venture,"  said  Thorin,  "and we  know  that 
still; and I still  think  that when we have won  it will be  time enough  to  think what 
to  do  about  it.  As  for  your  share,  Mr.  Baggins,  I  assure  you  we  are  more  than 
grateful and you shall choose you own fourteenth, as soon as we have anything to 

####-divide, am sorry if you are worried about transport, and I admit the difficulties are 
great-the  lands  have  not  become  less  wild  with  the  passing  of  time,  rather  the 
reverse-but  we  will  do  whatever  we  can  for  you,  and  take  our  share  of  the  cost 
when the time comes. Believe me or not as you like!" 
From that the talk turned to the great hoard itself and to the things that Thorin 
and Balin remembered. They wondered if they were still lying there .unharmed in 
the  hall  below:  the  spears  that  were  made  for  the  armies  of  the  great  King 
Bladorthin  (long  since  dead),  each  had  a  thrice-forged head and  their  shafts were 
inlaid with  cunning gold, but  they were never delivered or paid  for;  shields made 
for warriors long dead; the great golden cup of Thror, two-handed, hammered and 
carven with birds and flowers whose eyes and petals were of jewels; coats of mail 
gilded and silvered and  impenetrable;  the necklace of Girion, Lord of Dale, made 
of five hundred emeralds green as grass, which he gave for the arming of his eldest 
son  in  a  coat  of  dwarf-linked rings the like of which had never been made before, 
for  it  was  wrought  of  pure  silver  to  the  power  and  strength  of  triple  steel.  But 
fairest  of  all  was  the  great  white  gem,  which  the  dwarves  had  found  beneath  the 
roots of the Mountain, the Heart of the Mountain, the Arkenstone of Thrain. 
"The  Arkenstone!  The  Arkenstone!"  murmured  Thorin  in  the  dark,  half 
dreaming with his chin upon his knees. "It was like a globe with a thousand facets; 
it shone like silver in the firelight, like water in the sun, like snow under the stars, 
like rain upon the Moon!" 
But  the enchanted desire of  the hoard had  fallen  from Bilbo. All  through  their 
talk  he  was  only  half  listening  to  them.  He  sat  nearest  to  the  door with  one  ear 
cocked  for  any  beginnings  of  a  sound  without,  his  other  was  alert  or  echoes 
beyond  the  murmurs  of  the  dwarves,  for  any  whisper  of  a  movement  from  far 
below.  
Darkness  grew  deeper  and  he  grew  ever  more  uneasy.  "Shut  the  door!"  he 
begged them. "I fear that dragon in my marrow. I like this silence far less than the 
uproar of last night. Shut the door before it is too late!" 
Something  in  his  voice  gave  the  dwarves  an  uncomfortable  feeling.  Slowly 
Thorin shook off his dreams and getting up he kicked away the stone that wedged 
the door. Then they thrust upon it, and it closed with a snap and a clang. No trace 
of a keyhole was there left on the inside. They were shut in the Mountain! 
And  not  a  moment  too  soon.  They  had  hardly  gone  any  distance  down  the 
tunnel  when  a  blow  smote  the  side  of  the  Mountain  like  the  crash  of  battering-
rams  made  of  forest  oaks  and  swung  by  giants.  The  rock  boomed,  the  walls 
cracked and stones fell from the roof on their heads. What would have happened if 

####-the door had still been open I don't like to think. They fled further down the tunnel 
glad to be still alive, while behind them outside they heard the roar and rumble of 
Smaug's  fury.  He  was  breaking  rocks  to  pieces,  smashing  wall  and  cliff  with  the 
lashings  of  his  huge  tail,  till  their  little  lofty  camping ground,  the  scorched grass, 
the thrush's stone, the snail-covered walls, the narrow ledge, and all disappeared in 
a  jumble  of  smithereens,  and  an  avalanche  of  splintered  stones  fell  over  the  cliff 
into the valley below.  
Smaug  had  left  his  lair  in  silent  stealth,  quietly  soared  into  the  air,  and  then 
floated heavy and slow in the dark like a monstrous crow, down the wind towards 
the  west  of  the  Mountain,  in  the  hopes  of  catching  unawares  something  or 
somebody  there,  and  of  spying  the outlet  to  the passage which  the  thief had used. 
This  was  the  outburst  of  his  wrath  when  he  could  find  nobody  and  see  nothing, 
even where he guessed the outlet must actually be. 
After  he  had  let  off  his  rage  in  this  way  he  felt  better  and  he  thought  in  his 
heart that he would not be troubled again from that direction. In-the meanwhile he 
had further vengeance to take. "Barrel-rider!" he snorted. "Your fee came from the 
waterside  and  up  the water  you  came with  out  a  doubt.  I  don't  know  your  smell, 
but if you are not one of those men of the Lake, you had their help. They shall see 
me and remember who is the real King under the Mountain!" 
He rose in fire and went away south towards the Running River.  
 

####-<h4>Chapter 13</h4> <br> 

Not at Home 

 
In  the  meanwhile,  the  dwarves  sat  in  darkness,  and  utter  silence  fell  about 
them.  Little  they  ate  and  little  they  spoke.  They  could  not  count  the  passing  of 
time; and  they  scarcely dared  to move,  for  the whisper of  their voices echoed and 
rustled in the tunnel. If they dozed, they woke still to darkness and to silence going 
on unbroken. At last after days and days of waiting, as it seemed, when they were 
becoming  choked  and  dazed  for  want  of  air,  they  could  bear  it  no  longer.  They 
would  almost  have  welcomed  sounds  from  below  of  the  dragon's  return.  In  the 
silence  they  feared  some  cunning  devilry  of  his,  but  they  could  not  sit  there  for 
ever. 
Thorin spoke: "Let us  try  the door!" he said. "I must feel  the wind on my face 
soon  or  die.  I  think  I  would  rather  be  smashed  by  Smaug  in  the  open  than 
suffocate in here!" 
So several of the dwarves got up and groped back to where the door had been. 
But  they  found  that  the  upper  end  of  the  tunnel  had  been  shattered  and  blocked 
with broken  rock. Neither key nor  the magic  it had once obeyed would ever  open 
that door again. 
"We are trapped!" they groaned. "This is the end. We shall die here." 
But  somehow,  just  when  the  dwarves  were  most  despairing,  Bilbo  felt  a 
strange  lightening  of  the  heart,  as  if  a  heavy  weight  had  gone  from  under  his 
waistcoat. 
"Come, come!" he  said.  "While  there's  life  there's hope!" as my  father used  to 
say,  and  'Third  time  pays  for  all.'  I  am  going  down  the  tunnel  once  again.  I  have 
been  that  way  twice,  when  I  knew  there  was  a  dragon  at  the  other  end,  so  I  will 
risk  a  third  visit  when  I  am  no  longer  sure.  Anyway  the  only  way  out  is  down. 
And I think time you had better all come with me." 
In desperation they agreed, and Thorin was the first go forward by Bilbo's side. 
"Now  do  be  careful!"  whispered  the  hobbit,  "and  quiet  as  you  can  be! There 
may be no Smaug at the bottom but then again there may be. Don't let us take any 
unnecessary risks!" 
Down,  down  they  went.  The  dwarves  could  not,  course,  compare  with  the 
hobbit  in  real  stealth,  and  the made  a  deal  of  puffing  and  shuffling which  echoes 
magnified alarmingly; but  though every now and again Bilbo  in  fear  stopped and 
listened,  not  a  sound  stirred  below  Near  the  bottom,  as  well  as  he  could  judge, 

####-Bilbo slipped on his ring and went ahead. But he did not need it: the darkness was 
complete,  and  they were  all  invisible,  ring  or  no  ring.  In  fact  so  black was  it  that 
the  hobbit  came  to  the  opening  unexpectedly,  put  his  hand  on  air,  stumbled  for 
ward, and rolled headlong into the hall! 
There he  lay face downwards on  the floor and did no dare  to get up, or hardly 
even  to  breathe.  But  nothing  moved.  There  was  not  a  gleam  of  light-unless,  as 
seemed to him, when at last he slowly raised his head, there was a pale white glint, 
above him and far off in the gloom. But certainly it was not a spark of dragon-fire, 
though the wormstench was heavy in the place, and the taste of vapour was on his 
tongue. 
At length Mr. Baggins could bear it no longer. "Come found you, Smaug, you 
worm!"  he  squeaked  aloud.  "Stop  playing  hide-and-seek!  Give  me  a  light,  and 
then eat me if you can catch me!" 
Faint echoes ran round the unseen hall, but there was no answer. Bilbo got up, 
and found that he did not know in what direction to turn. 
"Now  I  wonder  what  on  earth  Smaug  is  playing  at,"  he  said.  "He  is  not  at 
home  today  (or  tonight, or whatever it is), I do believe. If Oin and Gloin have not 
lost  their  time  tinder-boxes,  perhaps  we  can  make  a  little  light,  and  have  a  look 
round before the luck turns." 
"Light!" he cried. "Can anybody make a light?" 
The  dwarves,  of  course, were  very alarmed when Bilbo fell forward down the 
step with a bump into the hall, and they sat huddled just where he had left them at 
the end the tunnel. 
"Sh!  sh!"  they  hissed,  when  they  heard  his  voice:  and  though  that  helped  the 
hobbit  to  find  out where  they  were, was  some  time  before  he  could  get  anything 
else out of  them. But  in  the end, when Bilbo actually began  to stamp  in  the  floor, 
and  screamed  out  light!'  at  the  top  of  his  thrill  voice,  Thorin  gave  way,  and  Oin 
and Gloin were sent back  to  their bundles  at the top of the tunnel. After a while a 
twinkling  gleam  showed  them  returning,  in  with  a  small  pine-torch  alight  in  his 
hand,  and  Gloin  with  a  bundle  of  others  under  his  arm.  Quickly  Bilbo  trotted  to 
the  door  and  took  the  torch;  but  he  could  not  persuade  the  dwarves  to  light  the 
others  or  to  come  and  join  him  yet.  As  Thorin  carefully  explained,  Mr.  Baggins 
was  still  officially  their  expert  burglar  and  investigator.  If  he  liked  to  risk  a  light, 
that was  his  affair.  They would wait  in  the  tunnel  for  his  report. So  they  sat near 
the door and watched. 
They  saw  the  little  dark  shape  of  the  hobbit  start  across  the  floor  holding  his 
tiny  light aloft. Every now and again, while he was still near enough,  they caught 

####-a  glint  and  a  tinkle  as  he  stumbled  on  some  golden  thing. The  light grew  smaller 
as  he wandered  away  into  the  vast  hall;  then  it  began  to  rise  dancing  into  the  air. 
Bilbo was climbing  the great mound of  treasure. Soon he stood upon  the  top, and 
still  went  on.  Then  they  saw  him  halt  and  stoop  for  a  moment;  but  they  did  not 
know  the  reason.  It  was  the  Arkenstone,  the  Heart  of  the  Mountain.  So  Bilbo 
guessed  from  Thorin's  description;  but  indeed  there  could  not  be  two  such  gems, 
even in so marvellous a hoard, even in all the world. Ever as he climbed, the same 
white gleam had shone before him and drawn his feet towards Slowly it grew to a 
little  globe  of  pallid  light.  Now  as  came  near,  it  was  tinged  with  a  flickering 
sparkle  of man  colours  at  the  surface,  reflected  and  splintered  from  the wavering 
light  of  his  torch.  At  last  he  looked  down  upon  it  and  he  caught  his  breath.  The 
great  jewel  shone before he  feet of  its own  inner  light,  and yet,  cut  and  fashioned 
by  the  dwarves, who  had  dug  it  from  the  heart  of  the mountain  long  ago,  it  took 
all light that fell upon it and-changes it into ten thousand sparks of white radiance 
shot with glints of the rainbow.  
Suddenly  Bilbo's  arm  went  towards  it  drawn  by  it  enchantment.  His  small 
hand  would  not  close  about  it  for  it  was  a  large  and  heavy  gem;  but  he  lifted  it, 
shut his eyes, and put it in his deepest pocket. 
"Now  I  am  a  burglar  indeed!"  thought  he.  "But  I  suppose  I  must  tell  the 
dwarves  about  it-some  time. The  did  say  I  could  pick  and  choose my  own  share; 
and  I  think  I would  choose  this,  if  they  took  all  the  rest!" All  the same he had an 
uncomfortable  feeling  that  the picking and choosing had not  really been meant  to 
include  this marvellous gem, and  that  trouble would yet come of  it. Now he went 
on again. Down the other side of the great mound he climbed, and the spark of his 
torch  vanished  from  the  sight  of  the  watching  dwarves.  But  soon  they  saw  it  far 
away in the distance again. Bilbo was crossing the floor of the hall. 
He  went  on,  until  he  came  to  the  great  doors  at  the  further  side,  and  there  a 
draught  of  air  refreshed him, but  it almost puffed out his  light. He peeped  timidly 
through and caught a glimpse of great passages and of the dim beginnings of wide 
stairs  going  up  into  the  gloom. And  still  there was  no  sight  nor  sound  of  Smaug. 
He was  just  going  to  turn  and  go back, when  a black  shape  swooped  at him  and 
brushed his face. He squeaked and started, stumbled backwards and fell. His torch 
dropped head downwards and went out! 
"Only  a  bat,  I  suppose  and  hope!"  he  said  miserably.  But  now  what  am  I  to 
do? Which is East, South, North West?" 

####-"Thorin! Balin! Oin! Gloin! Fill! Kili!"  he  cried  as  loud  he  could-it seemed a 
thin  little  noise  in  the wide  blackness.  "The  light's  gone  out!  Someone  come  and 
find and help me!" For the moment his courage had failed together.  
Faintly  the  dwarves  heard  his  small  cries,  though  the  only  word  they  could 
catch was 'help!' 
"Now what on earth or under it has happened?" said Thorin. "Certainly not the 
dragon, or he would not go on squeaking." 
They waited a moment or two, and still there were no dragon-noises, no sound 
at  all  in  fact  but  Bilbo's  distant  voice.  "Come,  one  of  you,  get  another  light  or 
two!" Thorin ordered. "It seems we have got to go and help our burglar." 
"It  is  about  our  turn  to  help,"  said  Balin,  "and  I  am  quite  willing  to  go. 
Anyway I expect it is safe for the moment." 
Gloin  lit  several  more  torches,  and  then  they  all  crept  out,  one  by  one,  and 
went  along  the  wall  as  hurriedly  as  they  could.  It  was  not  long  before  they  met 
Bilbo  himself  coming  back  towards  them.  His  wits  had  quickly returned soon as 
he saw the twinkle of their lights. 
"Only  a  bat  and  a  dropped  torch,  nothing  worse!"  he  said  in  answer  to  their 
questions.  Though  they  were  much  relieved,  they  were  inclined  to  be  grumpy  at 
being frightened for nothing; but what they would have said, if he had told them at 
that  moment  about  the  Arkenstone,  I  don't  know.  The  mere  fleeting  glimpses  of 
treasure  which  they  had  caught  as  they  went  along  had  rekindled  all  the  fire  of 
their dwarvish hearts; and when the heart of a dwarf, even the most respectable, is 
wakened  by  gold  and  by  jewels,  he  grows  suddenly  bold,  and  he  may  become 
fierce. 
The  dwarves  indeed  no  longer  needed  any  urging.  All  were  now  eager  to 
explore  the  hall  while  they  had  the  chance,  and  willing  to  believe  that,  for  the 
present,  Smaug  was  away  from  home.  Each  now  gripped  a  lighted  torch;  and  as 
they  gazed,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  another,  they  forgot  fear  and  even 
caution.  They  spoke  aloud,  and  cried  out  to  one  another,  as  they  lifted  old 
treasures from the mound or from the wall and held them in the light caressing and 
fingering them. Fili and Kili were almost in merry mood, and finding still hanging 
there many  golden  harps  strung with  silver  they  took  them  and  struck  them;  and 
being  magical  (and  also  untouched  by  the  dragon,  who  had  small  interests  in 
music)  they  were  still  in  tune.  The  dark  hall  was  filled  with  a  melody  that  had 
long been silent. But most of the dwarves were more practical; they gathered gems 
and stuffed  their pockets, and  let what  they could  not carry far back through their 
fingers  with  a  sigh.  Thorin  was  not  least  among  these;  but  always  he  searched 

####-from side to side for something which he could not find. It was the Arkenstone but 
he spoke of it yet to no one. 
Now  the  dwarves  took  down  mail  and  weapons  from  the  walls,  and  armed 
themselves. Royal indeed did Thorin look, clad in a coat of gold-plated rings, with 
a silver hafted axe in a belt crusted with scarlet stones. 
"Mr.  Baggins!"  he  cried.  "Here  is  the  first  payment  of  your  reward!  Cast  off 
your old coat and put on this!" 
With  that  he  put  on  Bilbo  a  small  coat  of mail,  wrought  for  some  young  elf-
prince long ago. It was of silver-steel which the elves call mithril, and with it went 
a belt of pearls and crystals. A  light helm of  figured  leather, strengthened beneath 
with hoops of steel, and studded about the bring with white gems, was set upon the 
hobbit's head. 
"I  feel magnificent," he  thought;  "but  I expect  I  look  rather absurd. How  they 
would laugh on the Hill at home Still I wish there was a looking-glass handy!" 
All  the  same Mr. Baggins  kept  his  head more  clear  of  the  bewitchment  of  the 
hoard  than  the dwarves did. Long before  the dwarves were  tired of examining  the 
treasures he became wary of it and sat down on the floor; and he began to wonder 
nervously what the end of it all would be 
"I would give a good many of  these precious goblets,    thought, "for a drink of 
something cheering out of one Beorn's wooden bowls!" 
"Thorin!"  he  cried  aloud.  "What  next? We  are  armed,  but what  good  has  any 
armour ever been before against Smaug the Dreadful? This treasure is not yet won 
back.  We  are  not  looking  for  gold  yet,  but  for  a  way  of  escape;  and  we  have 
tempted luck too long!" 
'"You speak the truth!" answered Thorin, recovering his wits. "Let us go! I will 
guide you. Not  in a  thousand years should  I  forget  the ways of  this palace." Then 
he  hailed  the  others,  and  they  gathered  together,  and  holding  their  torches  above 
their  heads  they  passed  through  the  gaping  doors,  not  without many  a  backward 
glance of longing. 
Their  glittering  mail  they  had  covered  again  with  their  old  cloaks  and  their 
bright helms with their tattered hoods, and one by one they walked behind Thorin, 
a  line  of  little  lights  in  the  darkness  that  halted  often,  listening  in  fear  once more 
for any  rumour of  the dragon's coming. Though all  the old adornments were  long 
mouldered  or  destroyed,  and  though  all  was  befouled  and  blasted  with  the 
comings  and  goings  of  the  monster,  Thorin  knew  every  passage  and  every  turn. 
They  climbed  long  stairs,  and  turned  and  went  down  wide  echoing  ways,  and 
turned again and climbed yet more stairs, and yet more' stairs again. 

####-These were  smooth,  cut  out  of  the  living  rock  broad  and  lair;  and  up,  up,  the 
dwarves went, and  they met no sign of any  living  thing, only furtive shadows that 
fled  from  the  approach  of  their  torches  fluttering  in  the  draughts.  The  steps were 
not made, all the same, for hobbit-legs, and Bilbo was just feeling that he could go 
on no longer, when suddenly the roof sprang high and far beyond the reach of their 
torch-light.  A  white  glimmer  could  be  seen  coming  through  some  opening  far 
above,  and  the  air  smelt  sweeter.  Before  them  light  came  dimly  through  great 
doors, that hung twisted on their hinges and half burnt. 
"This  is  the  great  chamber  of Thror,"  said Thorin; "the hall of  feasting and of 
council. Not far off now is the Front Gate." 
They passed through the ruined chamber. Tables were rotting there; chairs and 
benches were lying there overturned, charred and decaying. Skulls and bones were 
upon  the  floor  among  flagons  and  bowls  and  broken  drinking-horns and dust. As 
they  came  through  yet more  doors  at  the  further  end,  a  sound  of  water  fell  upon 
their ears, and the grey light grew suddenly more full. 
"There is the birth of the Running River," said Thorin. "From here it hastens to 
the Gate. Let us follow it!" 
Out  of  a  dark  opening  in  a  wall  of  rock  there  issued  a  boiling  water,  and  it 
flowed  swirling  in  a  narrow  channel,  carved  and  made  straight  and  deep  by  the 
cunning of ancient hands. Beside it ran a stone-paved road, wide enough for many 
men  abreast.  Swiftly  along  this  they  ran,  and  round  a  wide-sweeping  turn-and 
behold!  before  them  stood  the  broad  light  of  day.  In  front  there  rose  a  tall  arch, 
still  showing  the  fragments  of  old  carven  work  within,  worn  and  splintered  and 
blackened  though  it was. A misty  sun  sent  its  pale  light  between  the  arms  of  the 
Mountain, and beams of gold fell on the pavement at the threshold. 
A whirl of bats frightened from slumber by their smoking torches flurried over 
them;  as  they  sprang  forward  their  feet  slithered  on  stones  rubbed  smooth  and 
slimed  by  the  passing  of  the  dragon.  Now  before  them  the  water  fell  noisily 
outward and foamed down towards the valley. They flung their pale torches to the 
ground,  and  stood  gazing  out  with  dazzled  eyes.  They  were  come  to  the  Front 
Gate, and were looking out upon Dale. 
"Well!"  said  Bilbo,  "I  never  expected  to  be  looking  out  of  this  door.  And  I 
never  expected  to  be  so  pleased  to  see  the  sun  again,  and  to  feel  the wind  on my 
face. But, ow! this wind is cold!" 
It  was.  A  bitter  easterly  breeze  blew  with  a  threat  of  oncoming  winter.  It 
swirled  over  and  round  the  arms  of  the  Mountain  into  the  valley,  and  sighed 
among the rocks. After their long time in the stewing depths of the dragon-haunted 

####-caverns,  they  shivered  in  the  sun.  Suddenly  Bilbo  realized  that  he  was  not  only 
tired but also very hungry indeed. "It seems to be late morning," he said, "and so I 
suppose  it  is more  or  less  breakfast-time  –  if  there  is any breakfast  to have. But  I 
don't  feel  that  Smaug's  front  doorstep  is  the  safest  place  for  a  meal.  Do  let's  go 
somewhere where we can sit quiet for a bit!" 
"Quite  right!"  said  Balin.  "And  I  think  I  know  which  way  we  should  go:  we 
ought to make for the old look-out post at the Southwest corner of the Mountain." 
"How far is that?" asked the hobbit. 
"Five  hours march,  I  should  think.  It will  be  rough  going.  The  road  from  the 
Gate along  the  left edge of  the  stream  seems all broken up. But  look down  there! 
The river loops suddenly east across Dale in front of the ruined town. At that point 
there was once a bridge, leading to steep stairs that climbed up the right bank, and 
so to a road running towards Ravenhill. There is (or was) a path that left the road 
and climbed up to the post. A hard climb, too, even if the old steps are still there." 
"Dear  me!"  grumbled  the  hobbit.  "More  walking  and  more  climbing  without 
breakfast! I wonder how many breakfasts, and other meals, we have missed inside 
that nasty clockless, timeless hole?" 
As  a  matter  of  fact  two  nights  and  the  day  between  had  gone  by  (and  not 
altogether without  food)  since  the dragon  smashed  the magic door, but Bilbo had 
quite  lost  count,  and  it  might  have  been  one  night  or  a  week  of  nights  for  all  he 
could tell. 
"Come, come!" said Thorin  laughing – his spirits had begun to rise again, and 
he  rattled  the  precious  stones  in  his  pockets.  "Don't  call  my  place  a  nasty  hole! 
You wait till it has been cleaned and redecorated!" 
"That won't be till Smaug's dead," said Bilbo glumly. "In the meanwhile where 
is he? I would give a good breakfast to know. I hope he is not up on the Mountain 
looking down at us!" 
 
That idea disturbed the dwarves mightily, and they quickly decided that Bilbo 
and Balin were right. 
"We must move  away  from  here,"  said Don.  "I  feel  as  if his  eyes were on  the 
back of my head." 
"It's  a  cold  lonesome  place,"  said Bombur.  "There may  be  drink,  but  I  see  no 
sign of food. A dragon would always be hungry in such parts." 
"Come on! Come on!" cried the others. "Let us follow Balm's path!" 
Under the rocky wall to the right there was no path, so on they trudged among 
the  stones  on  the  left  side  of  the  river,  and  the  emptiness  and  desolation  soon 

####-sobered  even Thorin  again. The  bridge  that Balin  had  spoken  of  they  found  long 
fallen, and most of its stones were now only boulders in the shallow noisy stream; 
but they forded the water without much difficulty, and found the ancient steps, and 
climbed  the  high  bank.  After  going  a  short  way  they  struck  the  old  road,  and 
before  long  came  to  a  deep  dell sheltered among  the rocks;  there  they rested for a 
while and had such a breakfast as they could, chiefly cram and water. (If you want 
to  know  what  cram  is,  I  can  only  say  that  I  don't  know  the  recipe;  but  it  is 
biscuitish,  keeps  good  indefinitely,  is  supposed  to  be  sustaining,  and  is  certainly 
not  entertaining,  being  in  fact  very  uninteresting  except  as  a  chewing  exercise.  It 
was made by the Lake-men for long journeys). 
After  that  they went on again; and now  the road struck westwards and  left  the 
river, and the great shoulder of the south-pointing mountain-spur drew ever nearer. 
At  length  they  reached  the  hill  path.  It  scrambled  steeply  up,  and  they  plodded 
slowly one behind the other, till at last in the late afternoon they came to the top of 
the ridge and saw the wintry sun going downwards to the West. 
Here  they  found  a  flat  place  without  a  wall  on  three  sides,  but  backed  to  the 
North by a  rocky  face  in which  there was an opening  like a door. From  that door 
there was a wide view East and South and West. 
"Here,"  said  Balin,  "in  the  old  days  we  used  always  to  keep  watchmen,  and 
that  door  behind  leads  into  a  rock-hewn  chamber  that  was  made  here  as  a 
guardroom.  There  were  several  places  like  it  round  the  Mountain.  But  there 
seemed small need for watching in the days of our prosperity, and the guards were 
made  over  comfortable,  perhaps  – otherwise we might have had  longer warnings 
of  the coming of  the dragon, and  things might have been different. Still,  "here we 
can now lie hid and sheltered for a while, and can see much without being seen." 
"Not much use, if we have been seen coming here," said Dori, who was always 
looking  up  towards  the Mountain's  peak,  as  if  he  expected  to  see Smaug  perched 
there like a bird on a steeple. 
"We must take our chance of that," said Thorin. "We can go no further to-day." 
"Hear, hear!" cried Bilbo, and flung himself on the ground. 
In the rock-chamber there would have been room for a hundred, and there was 
a  small  chamber  further  in,  more  removed  from  the  cold  outside.  It  was  quite 
deserted; not even wild animals seemed  to have used  it  in all  the days of Smaug's 
dominion. There they laid their burdens; and some threw themselves down at once 
and slept, but the others sat near the outer door and discussed their plans. 
In  all  their  talk  they  came  perpetually  back  to  one  thing: where was  Smaug? 
They  looked West  and  there was  nothing,  and  East  there was  nothing,  and  in  the 

####-South  there  was  no  sign  of  the  dragon,  but  there  was  a  gathering  of  very  many 
birds. At  that  they gazed and wondered; but they were no nearer understanding it, 
when the first cold stars came out. 

####-<h4>Chapter 14</h4> <br> 

Fire and Water 

 
Now  if you wish,  like  the dwarves,  to hear news of Smaug, you must go back 
again  to  the  evening  when  he  smashed  the  door  and  flew  off  in  rage,  two  days 
before. 
The  men  of  the  lake-town  Esgaroth  were  mostly  indoors,  for  the  breeze  was 
from the black East and chill, but a few were walking on the quays, and watching, 
as they were fond of doing, the stars shine out from the smooth patches of the lake 
as  they  opened  in  the  sky.  From  their  town  the  Lonely  Mountain  was  mostly 
screened  by  the  low  hills  at  the  far  end  of  the  lake,  through  a  gap  in  which  the 
Running  River  came  down  from  the North. Only  its  high  peak  could  they  see  in 
clear weather, and they looked seldom at it, for it was ominous and dreary even in 
the light of morning. Now it was lost and gone, blotted in the dark. 
Suddenly it flickered back to view; a brief glow touched it and faded. 
"Look!"  said  one.  "The  lights  again!  Last  night  the watchmen  saw  them start 
and fade from midnight until dawn. Something is happening up there." 
"Perhaps  the  King  under  the  Mountain  is  forging  gold,"  said  another.  "It  is 
long since he went north. It is time the songs began to prove themselves again." 
"Which  king?"  said  another  with  a  grim  voice.  "As  like  as  not  it  is  the 
marauding  fire  of  the  Dragon,  the  only  king  under  the  Mountain  we  have  ever 
known." 
"You  are  always  foreboding  gloomy  things!"  said  the  others.  "Anything  from 
floods to poisoned fish. Think of something cheerful!" 
Then  suddenly  a  great  light  appeared  in  the  low  place  in  the  hills  and  the 
northern end of the lake turned golden. 
"The King  beneath  the Mountain!"  they  shouted.  "His wealth  is  like  the  Sun, 
his silver like a fountain, his rivers golden run! The  river is running gold from the 
Mountain!"  they  cried,  and  everywhere  windows  were  opening  and  feet  were 
hurrying. 
There was once more a  tremendous excitement and enthusiasm. But  the grim-
voiced fellow ran hotfoot to the Master. "The dragon is coming or I am a fool!" he 
cried. "Cut the bridges! To arms! To arms!" 
Then  warning  trumpets  were  suddenly  sounded,  and  echoed  along  the  rocky 
shores.  The  cheering  stopped  and  the  joy was  turned  to  dread.  So  it was  that  the 
dragon  did  not  find  them  quite  unprepared.  Before  long,  so  great was  his  speed, 

####-they  could  see  him  as  a  spark  of  fire  rushing  towards  them  and  growing  ever 
huger  and more  bright,  and  not  the most  foolish  doubted  that  the  prophecies  had 
gone  rather wrong. Still  they had a  little  time. Every vessel  in  the town was filled 
with  water,  every  warrior  was  armed,  every  arrow  and  dart  was  ready,  and  the 
bridge  to  the  land  was  thrown  down  and  destroyed,  before  the  roar  of  Smaug's 
terrible  approach  grew  loud,  and  the  lake  rippled  red  as  fire  beneath  the  awful 
beating of his wings. 
Amid  shrieks  and  wailing  and  the  shouts  of  men  he  came  over  them,  swept 
towards the bridges and was foiled! The bridge was gone, and his enemies were on 
an  island  in  deep  water-too  deep  and  dark  and  cool  for  his  liking.  If  he  plunged 
into  it, a vapour and a steam would arise enough  to cover all  the  land with a mist 
for days; but  the  lake was mightier  than he,  it would quench him before he could 
pass through. 
Roaring  he  swept  back  over  the  town.  A  hail  of  dark  arrows  leaped  up  and 
snapped and  rattled on his  scales and  jewels, and  their  shafts  fell back kindled by 
his  breath  burning  and  hissing  into  the  lake.  No  fireworks  you  ever  imagined 
equalled the sights that night. At the twanging of the bows and the shrilling of the 
trumpets  the  dragon's wrath blazed to its height, till he was blind and mad with it. 
No  one  had  dared  to  give  battle  to  him  for  many  an  age;  nor  would  they  have 
dared  now,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  grim-voiced man  (Bard was his name), who 
ran to and fro cheering on the archers and urging the Master to order them to fight 
to the last arrow.  
Fire leaped from the dragon's jaws. He circled for a while high in the air above 
them lighting all the lake; the trees by the shores shone like copper and like blood 
with  leaping shadows of dense black at their feet. Then down he swooped straight 
through  the  arrow-storm,  reckless  in  his  rage,  taking  no  heed  to  turn  his  scaly 
sides towards his foes, seeking only to set their town ablaze. 
Fire  leaped  from  thatched  roofs  and  wooden  beam-ends  as  he  hurtled  down 
and  past  and  round  again,  though  all  had  been  drenched  with  water  before  he 
came. Once more water was flung by a hundred hands wherever a spark appeared. 
Back  swirled  the  dragon.  A  sweep  of  his  tail  and  the  roof  of  the  Great  House 
crumbled  and  smashed  down.  Flames  unquenchable  sprang  high  into  the  night. 
Another  swoop and another, and another house and  then another  sprang afire and 
fell;  and  still  no  arrow  hindered  Smaug  or  hurt  him  more  than  a  fly  from  the 
marshes.  Already  men  were  jumping  into  the  water  on  every  side.  Women  and 
children  were  being  huddled  into  laden  boats  in  the  market-pool. Weapons were 
flung down. There was mourning and weeping, where but a little time ago the old 

####-songs  of mirth  to  come  had  been  sung  about  the  dwarves. Now men cursed  their 
names.  The  Master  himself  was  turning  to  his  great  gilded  boat,  hoping  to  row 
away  in  the confusion and save himself. Soon all  the  town would be deserted and 
burned down to the surface of the lake. That was the dragon's hope. They could all 
get  into  boats  for  all  he  cared.  There  he  could  have  fine  sport  hunting  them,  or 
they could stop till they starved. Let them try to get to land and he would be ready. 
Soon  he  would  set  all  the  shoreland  woods  ablaze  and  wither  every  field  and 
pasture.  Just  now  he  was  enjoying  the  sport  of  town-baiting  more  than  he  had 
enjoyed anything for years. But there was still a company of archers that held their 
ground among the burning houses. Their captain was Bard, grim-voiced and grim-
faced,  whose  friends  had  accused  him  of  prophesying  floods  and  poisoned  fish, 
though  they  knew  his  worth  and  courage.  He  was  a  descendant  in  long  line  of 
Girion, Lord of Dale, whose wife and child had escaped down  the Running River 
from  the  ruin  long  ago. Now  he  shot with  a  great yew bow,  till all his arrows but 
one were spent. The flames were near him. His companions were leaving him. He 
bent his bow for  the  last  time. Suddenly out of  the dark something fluttered  to his 
shoulder.  He  started-but  it was  only  an  old  thrush. Unafraid  it perched by his ear 
and it brought him news. Marvelling he found he could understand its tongue, for 
he was of the race of Dale. 
"Wait! Wait!"  it  said  to  him.  "The moon  is  rising.  Look  for  the  hollow  of  the 
left  breast  as  he  flies  and  turns  above  you!" And while Bard paused  in wonder  it 
told  him  of  tidings  up  in  the  Mountain  and  of  all  that  it  had  heard.  Then  Bard 
drew his bow-string to his ear. The dragon was circling back, flying low, and as he 
came the moon rose above the eastern shore and silvered his great wings. 
"Arrow!"  said  the  bowman.  "Black  arrow!  I  have  saved  you  to  the  last.  You 
have never  failed me and always  I have  recovered you.  I had you  from my  father 
and  he  from  of  old.  If  ever  you  came  from  the  forges  of  the  true  king  under  the 
Mountain, go now and speed well!" 
The  dragon  swooped  once more  lower  than  ever,  and  as  he  turned  and  dived 
down his belly glittered white with  sparkling  fires of gems  in  the moon-but not in 
one place. The great bow  twanged. The black arrow sped straight from  the string, 
straight  for  the  hollow  by  the  left  breast  where  the  foreleg  was  flung  wide.  In  it 
smote and vanished, barb, shaft and  feather, so  fierce was  its  flight. With a shriek 
that  deafened men,  felled  trees  and  split  stone,  Smaug  shot  spouting  into  the  air, 
turned over and crashed down from on high in ruin. 
Full on  the  town he  fell. His  last  throes splintered  it  to sparks and gledes. The 
lake roared  in. A vast steam  leaped up, white  in  the sudden dark under  the moon. 

####-There  was  a  hiss,  a  gushing  whirl,  and  then  silence.  And  that  was  the  end  of 
Smaug  and  Esgaroth,  but  not  of  Bard.  The waxing moon  rose  higher  and  higher 
and the wind grew loud and cold. It twisted the white fog into bending pillars and 
hurrying  clouds  and  drove  it  off  to  the West  to  scatter  in  tattered  shreds over  the 
marshes before Mirkwood. Then the many boats could be seen dotted dark on the 
surface of  the  lake, and down  the wind came  the voices of  the people of Esgaroth 
lamenting  their  lost  town and goods and  ruined houses. But  they had  really much 
to be  thankful  for, had  they  thought of  it,  though  it  could hardly be  expected  that 
they should just then: three quarters of the people of the town had at least escaped 
alive;  their  woods  and  fields  and  pastures  and  cattle  and  most  of  their  boats 
remained undamaged; and the dragon was dead. What that meant they had not yet 
realized. 
They  gathered  in  mournful  crowds  upon  the  western  shores,  shivering  in  the 
cold wind,  and  their  first  complaints  and  anger were  against  the Master, who had 
left the town so soon, while some were still willing to defend it. 
"He  may  have  a  good  head  for  business-especially  his  own  business,"  some 
murmured, "but he  is no good when anything serious happens!" And  they praised 
the courage of Bard and his last mighty shot. "If only he had not been killed," they 
all  said,  "we  would  make  him  a  king.  Bard  the  Dragon-shooter  of  the  line  of 
Girion! Alas that he is lost!" 
And  in  the very midst of  their  talk, a  tall figure stepped from  the shadows. He 
was drenched with water, his black hair hung wet over his face and shoulders, and 
a fierce light was in his eyes. 
"Bard  is  not  lost!"  he  cried.  "He  dived  from  Esgaroth,  when  the  enemy  was 
slain. I am Bard, of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the dragon!" 
"King  Bard!  King  Bard!"  they  shouted;  but  the Master  ground  his  chattering 
teeth. 
"Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth," he said. "In the Lake-town we 
have  always  elected masters  from  among  the old  and wise,  and have not  endured 
the rule of mere fighting men. Let 'King Bard' go back to his own kingdom-Dale is 
now freed by his valour, and nothing binders his return. And any that wish can go 
with  him,  if  they  prefer  the  cold  shores  under  the  shadow  of  the Mountain  to  the 
green shores of the lake. The wise will stay here and hope to rebuild our town, and 
enjoy again in time its peace and riches." 
"We will have King Bard!" the people near at hand shouted in reply. "We have 
had  enough  of  the  old men  and  the money-counters!" And people further off took 

####-up the cry: "Up the Bowman, and down with Moneybags," till the clamour echoed 
along the shore. 
"I  am  the  last man  to  undervalue  Bard  the  Bowman,"  said  the Master warily 
(for Bard now stood close beside him). "He has tonight earned an eminent place in 
the  roll  of  the  benefactors  of  our  town;  and  he  is  worthy  of  many  imperishable 
songs.  But,  why  O  People?"-and  here  the Master  rose  to  his  feet  and  spoke  very 
loud and clear – "why do I get all your blame? For what fault am I to be deposed? 
Who  aroused  the  dragon  from  his  slumber,  I might  ask? Who obtained of us rich 
gifts  and  ample  help,  and  led  us  to  believe  that  old  songs  could  come  true? Who 
played  on  our  soft  hearts  and  our  pleasant  fancies? What  sort  of  gold  have  they 
sent  down  the  river  to  reward  us?  Dragon-fire  and  ruin!  From  whom  should we 
claim the recompense of our damage, and aid for our widows and orphans?" 
As  you  see,  the Master  had  not  got  his  position  for  nothing.  The  result  of  his 
words  was  that  for  the  moment  the  people  quite  forgot  their  idea  of  a  new  king, 
and  turned  their angry  thoughts  towards Thorin and his company. Wild and bitter 
words were shouted from many sides; and some of those who had before sung the 
old  songs  loudest,  were  now  heard  as  loudly  crying  that  the  dwarves  had  stirred 
the dragon up against them deliberately! 
"Fools!" said Bard. "Why waste words and wrath on those unhappy creatures? 
Doubtless  they  perished  first  in  fire,  before  Smaug  came  to  us."  Then  even  as  he 
was  speaking,  the  thought  came  into  his  heart  of  the  fabled  treasure  of  the 
Mountain lying without guard or owner, and he fell suddenly silent. He thought of 
the Master's  words,  and  of  Dale  rebuilt,  and  filled  with  golden  bells,  if  he  could 
but find the men. 
At  length  he  spoke  again:  "This  is  no  time  for  angry  words.  Master,  or  for 
considering weighty plans of change. There is work to do. I serve you still-though 
after  a  while  I  may  think  again  of  your  words  and  go  North  with  any  that  will 
follow me." 
Then  he  strode  off  to  help  in  the  ordering  of  the  camps  and  in  the  care  of  the 
sick  and  the  wounded.  But  the  Master  scowled  at  his  back  as  he  went,  and 
remained  sitting  on  the  ground. He  thought much  but  said  little,  unless  it was  to 
call  loudly  for  men  to  bring  him  fire  and  food.  Now  everywhere  Bard  went  he 
found  talk  running  like  fire  among  the  people  concerning  the  vast  treasure  that 
was  now  unguarded.  Men  spoke  of  the  recompense  for  all  their  harm  that  they 
would soon get from it, and wealth over and to spare with which to buy rich things 
from  the  South;  and  it  cheered  them  greatly  in  their  plight.  That was as well,  for 
the night was bitter and miserable. Shelters could be contrived for few (the Master 

####-had one)  and  there was  little  food  (even  the Master went  short). Many  took  ill of 
wet  and  cold  and  sorrow  that  night,  and  afterwards  died,  who  had  escaped 
uninjured from the ruin of the town; and in the days that followed there was much 
sickness and great hunger.  
Meanwhile  Bard  took  the  lead,  and  ordered  things  as  he  wished,  though 
always  in  the  Master's  name,  and  he  had  a  hard  task  to  govern  the  people  and 
direct  the  preparations  for  their  protection  and  housing.  Probably  most  of  them 
would  have  perished  in  the winter  that  now  hurried  after  autumn,  if  help  had  not 
been to hand. But help came swiftly; for Bard at once had speedy messengers sent 
up  the  river  to  the Forest  to ask  the aid of  the King of  the Elves of  the Wood, and 
these messengers had found a host already on the move, although it was then only 
the third day after the fall of Smaug. 
The Elvenking had received news from his own messengers and from the birds 
that  loved  his  folk,  and  already  knew  much  of  what  had  happened.  Very  great 
indeed was  the commotion among all  things with wings  that dwelt on  the borders 
of  the Desolation of  the Dragon. The  air was  filled with  circling  flocks,  and  their 
swift-flying messengers  flew  here  and  there  across  the  sky.  Above  the  borders  of 
the  Forest  there  was  whistling,  crying  and  piping.  Far  over  Mirkwood  tidings 
spread: "Smaug is dead!" Leaves rustled and startled ears were lifted. Even before 
the  Elvenking  rode  forth  the  news  had  passed west  right  to  the  pinewoods  of  the 
Misty Mountains; Beorn had heard it in his wooden house, and the goblins were at 
council in their caves. 
"That  will  be  the  last  we  shall  hear  of  Thorin  Oakenshield,  I  fear,"  said  the 
king. "He would have done better to have remained my guest. It is an ill wind, all 
the  same,"  he  added,  "that  blows  no  one  any  good."  For  he  too  had  not  forgotten 
the legend of the wealth of Thror. So it was that Bard's messengers found him now 
marching  with  many  spearmen  and  bowmen;  and  crows  were  gathered  thick, 
above him,  for  they  thought  that war was awakening again,  such as had not been 
in  those parts  for a  long age. But  the king, when he  received  the prayers of Bard, 
had  pity,  for  he  was  the  lord  of  a  good  and  kindly  people;  so  turning  his march, 
which  had  at  first  been  direct  towards  the  Mountain,  he  hastened  now  down  the 
river  to  the  Long  Lake.  He  had  not  boats  or  rafts  enough  for  his  host,  and  they 
were  forced  to  go  the  slower way  by  foot;  but  great  store  of  goods he sent ahead 
by water. Still elves are light–footed, and though they were not in these days much 
used  to  the  marches  and  the  treacherous  lands  between  the  Forest  and  the  Lake, 
their going was swift. Only five days after the death of the dragon they came upon 
the  shores and  looked on  the  ruins of  the  town. Their welcome was good, as may 

####-be expected, and the men and their Master were ready to make any bargain for the 
future in return for the Elvenking's aid. 
Their plans were soon made. With the women and the children, the old and the 
unfit,  the  Master  remained  behind;  and  with  him  were  some  men  of  crafts  and 
many  skilled  elves;  and  they  busied  themselves  felling  trees,  and  collecting  the 
timber  sent  down  from  the  Forest.  Then  they  set  about  raising  many  huts  by  the 
shore  against  the  oncoming  winter;  and  also  under  the  Master's  direction  they 
began  the planning of a new  town, designed more fair and  large even  than before, 
but not  in  the  same place. They  removed northward higher up  the  shore;  for  ever 
after  they  had  a  dread  of  the  water  where  the  dragon  lay.  He  would  never  again 
return to his golden bed, but was stretched cold as stone, twisted upon the floor of 
the  shallows.  There  for  ages  his  huge  bones  could  be  seen  in  calm weather  amid 
the  ruined  piles  of  the old  town. But  few dared  to cross  the cursed spot, and none 
dared  to dive  into  the shivering water or recover  the precious stones  that fell from 
his rotting carcass. 
But  all  the men  of  arms  who  were  still  able,  and  the most  of  the  Elvenking's 
array,  got  ready  to march  north  to  the Mountain.  It  was  thus  that  in  eleven  days 
from the ruin of the town the head of their host passed the rock-gates at the end of 
the lake and came into the desolate lands. 

####-<h4>Chapter 15</h4> <br> 

The Gathering of the Clouds 

 
Now  we  will  return  to  Bilbo  and  the  dwarves.  All  night  one  of  them  had 
watched,  but when morning  came  they  had  not  heard  or  seen  any  sign  of  danger. 
But ever more thickly the birds were gathering. Their companies came flying from 
the  South;  and  the  crows  that  still  lived  about  the Mountain  were  wheeling  and 
crying unceasingly above. 
"Something  strange  is  happening,"  said  Thorin.  "The  time  has  gone  for  the 
autumn  wanderings;  and  these  are  birds  that  dwell  always  in  the  land;  there  are 
starlings  and  flocks  of  finches;  and  far  off  there  are  many  carrion  birds  as  if  a 
battle were afoot!" 
Suddenly Bilbo pointed: "There  is  that old  thrush again!" he cried. "He seems 
to have escaped, when Smaug  smashed  the mountain-side, but I don't suppose the 
snails have!" 
Sure  enough  the  old  thrush was  there,  and  as  Bilbo  pointed,  he  flew  towards 
them  and  perched  on  a  stone  near  by. Then  he  fluttered  his wings  and  sang;  then 
he  cocked  his  head  on  one  side,  as  if  to  listen;  and  again  he  sang,  and  again  he 
listened. 
"I  believe  he  is  trying  to  tell  us  something,"  said  Balin;  "but  I  cannot  follow 
the  speech  of  such  birds,  it  is  very  quick  and  difficult.  Can  you  make  it  out 
Baggins?" 
"Not very well," said Bilbo (as a matter of fact, he could make nothing of it at 
all); "but the old fellow seems .very excited." 
"I only wish he was a raven!" said Balin. 
"I  thought  you  did  not  like  them!  You  seemed  very  shy  of  them,  when  we 
came this way before." 
"Those  were  crows!  And  nasty  suspicious-looking  creatures  at  that,  and  rude 
as  well.  You  must  have  heard  the  ugly  names  they were  calling  after  us. But  the 
ravens  are  different.  There  used  to  be  great  friendship  between  them  and  the 
people  of  Thror;  and  they  often  brought  us  secret  news,  and were  rewarded with 
such bright things as they coveted to hide in their dwellings. 
"They  live many  a  year,  and  their memories  are  long,  and  they  hand  on  their 
wisdom to their children. I knew many among the ravens of the rocks when I was 
a  dwarf-  lad.  This  very  height  was  once  named  Ravenhill,  because  there  was  a 

####-wise  and  famous  pair,  old  Care  and  his  wife,  that  lived  here  above  the  guard-
chamber. But I don't suppose that any of that ancient breed linger here now." 
No  sooner  had  he  finished  speaking  than  the  old  thrush  gave  a  loud  call,  and 
immediately flew away.  
"We may not understand him, but that old bird understands us, I am sure," said 
Balin. "Keep watch now, and see what happens!" 
Before  long  there  was  a  fluttering  of  wings,  and  back  came  the  thrush;  and 
with him came a most decrepit old bird. He was getting blind, he could hardly fly, 
and  the  top of his head was bald. He was an aged raven of great size. He alighted 
stiffly  on  the  ground  before  them,  slowly  flapped  his wings,  and  bobbed  towards 
Thorin. 
"O  Thorin  son  of  Thrain,  and  Balin  son  of  Fundin,"  he  croaked  (and  Bilbo 
could  understand  what  he  said,  for  he  used  ordinary  language  and  not  bird-
speech).  "I  am  Róac  son  of  Carc.  Carc  is  dead,  but  he  was  well  known  to  you 
once. It is a hundred years and three and fifty since I came out of the egg, but I do 
not  forget what my  father  told me. Now  I  am  the  chief  of  the  great  ravens  of  the 
Mountain. We are few, but we remember still the king that was of old. Most of my 
people are abroad, for there are great tidings in the South – some are tidings of joy 
to you, and some you will not think so good. 
"Behold! the birds are gathering back again to the Mountain and to Dale from 
South and East and West, for word has gone out that Smaug is dead!" 
"Dead!  Dead?"  shouted  the  dwarves.  "Dead!  Then  we  have  been  in  needless 
fear-and the treasure is ours!" 
They all sprang up and began to caper about for joy.  
"Yes,  dead,"  said Róac. "The  thrush, may his feathers never fall, saw him die, 
and  we may  trust  his  words.  He  saw  him  fall  in  battle  with  the men  of  Esgaroth 
the third night back from now at the rising of the moon." 
It was some time before Thorin could bring the dwarves to be silent and listen 
to  the  raven's  news. At  length when  he  had  told  all  the  tale  of  the  battle  he went 
on: 
"So  much  for  joy,  Thorin  Oakenshield.  You  may  go  back  to  your  halls  in 
safety;  all  the  treasure  is  yours-for  the  moment.  But  many  are  gathering  hither 
beside  the  birds.  The  news  of  the  death  of  the  guardian  has  already  gone  far  and 
wide, and the legend of the wealth of Thror has not lost in the telling during many 
years; many are eager for a share of the spoil. Already a host of the elves is on the 
way,  and  carrion birds  are with  them hoping  for battle  and  slaughter. By  the  lake 
men murmur  that  their sorrows are due  to  the dwarves; for  they are homeless and 

####-many  have  died,  and  Smaug  has  destroyed  their  town.  They  too  think  to  find 
amends from your treasure, whether you are alive or dead. 
"Your  own wisdom must  decide  your  course,  but  thirteen  is  small  remnant  of 
the great folk of Durin that once dwelt here, and now are scattered far. If you will 
listen to my counsel, you will not trust the Master of the Lake-men, but rather him 
that  shot  the  dragon  with  his  bow.  Bard  is  he,  of  the  race  of  Dale,  of  the  line  of 
Girion; he is a grim man but true. We would see peace once more among dwarves 
and  men  and  elves  after  the  long  desolation;  but  it  may  cost  you  dear  in  gold.  I 
have spoken." 
Then Thorin burst forth in anger: "Our thanks, Róac Carc's son. You and your 
people shall not be forgotten. But none of our gold shall thieves take or the violent 
carry  off  while  we  are  alive.  If  you  would  earn  our  thanks  still  more,  bring  us 
news of any that draw near. Also I would beg of you, if any of you are still young 
and strong of wing, that you would send messengers to our kin in the mountains of 
the  North,  both  west  from  here  and  east,  and  tell  them  of  our  plight.  But  go 
specially to my cousin Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people well-armed, 
and dwells nearest to this place. Bid him hasten!" 
"I  will  not  say  if  this  counsel  be  good  or  bad,"  croaked  Róac;  "but  I will  do 
what can be done." Then off he slowly flew.  
"Back now to the Mountain!" cried Thorin. "We have little time to lose." 
"And  little  food  to  use!"  cried  Bilbo,  always  practical  on  such  points.  In  any 
case  he  felt  that  the  adventure was, properly speaking, over  .with  the death of  the 
dragon-in  which  he  was  much  mistaken-and  he  would  have  given  most  of  his 
share of the profits for the peaceful winding up of these affairs. 
"Back  to  the  Mountain!"  cried  the  dwarves  as  if  they  had  not  heard  him;  so 
back he had  to go with  them. As you have heard  some of  the  events  already, you 
will  see  that  the  dwarves  still  had  some  days  before  them.  They  explored  the 
caverns  once  more,  and  found,  as  they  expected,  that  only  the  Front  Gate 
remained  open;  all  the  other  gates  (except,  of  course,  the  small  secret  door)  had 
long  ago  been  broken  and  blocked  by  Smaug,  and  no  sign  of  them  remained.  So 
now  they  began  to  labour  hard  in  fortifying  the  main  entrance,  and  in  remaking 
the  road  that  led  from  it.  Tools  were  to  be  found  in  plenty  that  the  miners  and 
quarriers  and  builders  of  old  had  used;  and  at  such  work  the  dwarves  were  still 
very skilled. 
As  they  worked  the  ravens  brought  them  constant  tidings.  In  this  way  they 
learned  that  the  Elvenking  had  turned  aside  to  the  Lake,  and  they  still  had  a 
breathing  space. Better  still,  they heard  that  three of  their ponies had escaped and 

####-were wandering wild far down the banks of the Running River, not far from where 
the  rest of  their  stores had been  left. So while  the others went on with  their work, 
Fili  and  Kili  were  sent,  guided  by  a  raven,  to  find  the  ponies  and  bring  back  all 
they could. 
They were  four  days  gone,  and  by  that  time  they  knew  that  the  joined  armies 
of  the  Lake-men  and  the  Elves  were  hurrying  towards  the  Mountain.  But  now 
their hopes were higher; for they had food for some weeks with care-chiefly cram, 
of course, and they were very tired of it; but cram is much better than nothing-and 
already the gate was blocked with a wall of squared stones laid dry, but very thick 
and  high  across  the  opening.  There  were  holes  in  the  wall  through  which  they 
could  see  (or  shoot)  but  no  entrance.  They  climbed  in  or  out  with  ladders,  and 
hauled stuff up with ropes. For the issuing of the stream they had contrived a small 
low arch under the new wall; but near the entrance they had so altered the narrow 
bed  that  a wide pool  stretched  from  the mountain-wall to the head of the fall over 
which  the  stream  went  towards  Dale.  Approach  to  the  Gate  was  now  only 
possible, without  swimming,  along  a narrow  ledge of  the  cliff,  to  the  right  as one 
looked  outwards  from  the wall.  The  ponies  they  had  brought  only  to  the  head  of 
the  steps  above  the  old  bridge,  and  unloading  them  there  had  bidden  them  return 
to their masters and sent them back riderless to the South. 
There  came  a  night  when  suddenly  there  were  many  lights  as  of  fires  and 
torches away south in Dale before them. 
"They  have  come!"  called  Balin.  "And  their  camp  is  very  great.  They  must 
have come into the valley under the cover of dusk along both banks of the river." 
That night the dwarves slept little. The morning was still pale when they saw a 
company approaching. From behind  their wall  they watched  them come up  to  the 
valley's head and climb slowly up. Before long they could see that both men of the 
lake  armed  as  if  for  war  and  elvish  bowmen  were  among  them.  At  length  the 
foremost  of  these  climbed  the  tumbled  rocks  and  appeared  at  the  top  of  the  falls; 
and very great was their surprise to see the pool before them and the Gate blocked 
with a wall of new-hewn stone. 
As they stood pointing and speaking to one another Thorin hailed them: "Who 
are  you,"  he  called  in  a  very  loud  voice,  "that  come  as  if  in  war  to  the  gates  of 
Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain, and what do you desire?" 
But  they  answered  nothing.  Some  turned  swiftly  back,  and  the  others  after 
gazing  for  a while  at  the Gate  and  its  defences  soon  followed  them. That  day  the 
camp was moved  and was  brought  right  between  the  arms  of  the Mountain.  The 
rocks echoed then with voices and with song, as they had not done for many a day. 

####-There was  the  sound,  too,  of  elven-harps and of sweet music; and as  it echoed up 
towards  them  it  seemed  that  the  chill  of  the  air  was  warmed,  and  they  caught 
faintly the fragrance of woodland flowers blossoming in spring. 
Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark fortress and to go down and join in 
the mirth  and  feasting  by  the  fires.  Some  of  the  younger  dwarves were moved  in 
their  hearts,  too,  and  they  muttered  that  they  wished  things  had  fallen  out 
otherwise and that they might welcome such folk as friends; but Thorin scowled. 
Then  the  dwarves  themselves  brought  forth  harps  and  instruments  regained 
from  the  hoard,  and  made  music  to  soften  his  mood;  but  their  song  was  not  as 
elvish song, and was much like the song they had sung long before in Bilbo's little 
hobbit-hole. 
 

Under the Mountain dark and tall 
The King has come unto his hall! 
His foe is dead, the Worm of Dread, 
And ever so his foes shall fall. 
 
The sword is sharp, the spear is long, 
The arrow swift, the Gate is strong; 
The heart is bold that looks on gold; 
The dwarves no more shall suffer wrong. 
 
The dwarves of yore made mighty spells, 
While hammers fell like ringing bells 
In places deep, where dark things sleep, 
In hollow halls beneath the fells. 
 
On silver necklaces they strung 
The light of stars, on crowns they hung 
The dragon-fire, from twisted wire  
The melody of harps they wrung. 
 
The mountain throne once more is freed! 
O! wandering folk, the summons heed! 
Come haste! Come haste! across the waste! 
The king of friend and kin has need. 
 
Now call we over mountains cold, 
'Come hack unto the caverns old'! 
Here at the Gates the king awaits, 

####-His hands are rich with gems and gold. 
 
The king is come unto his hall 
Under the Mountain dark and tall. 
The Worm of Dread is slain and dead, 
And ever so our foes shall fall! 

 
This song appeared to please Thorin, and he smiled again and grew merry; and 
he began reckoning the distance to the Iron Hills and how long it would be before 
Dain  could  reach  the  Lonely Mountain,  if  he  had  set  out  as  soon  as  the message 
reached  him.  But  Bilbo's  heart  fell,  both  at  the  song  and  the  talk:  they  sounded 
much  too  warlike.  The  next  morning  early  a  company  of  spearmen  was  seen 
crossing  the  river,  and  marching  up  the  valley.  They  bore  with  them  the  green 
banner of the Elvenking and the blue banner of the Lake, and they advanced until 
they stood right before the wall at the Gate. 
Again Thorin hailed  them  in a  loud voice: "Who are you  that come armed for 
war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain?" This time he 
was answered. 
A  tall  man  stood  forward,  dark  of  hair  and  grim  of  face,  and  he  cried:  "Hail 
Thorin! Why do you fence yourself like a robber in his hold? We are not yet foes, 
and  we  rejoice  that  you  are  alive  beyond  our  hope.  We  came  expecting  to  find 
none  living  here;  yet  now  that  we  are  met  there  is  matter  for  a  parley  and  a 
council." 
"Who are you, and of what would you parley?" 
"I am Bard, and by my hand was the dragon slain and your treasure delivered. 
Is that not a matter that concerns you? Moreover I am by right descent the heir of 
Girion of Dale,  and  in your hoard  is mingled much of  the wealth of his halls  and 
town,  which  of  old  Smaug  stole.  Is  not  that  a  matter  of  which  we  may  speak? 
Further  in  his  last  battle  Smaug  destroyed  the  dwellings  of  the men  of  Esgaroth, 
and  I  am  yet  the  servant  of  their Master.  I would  speak  for  him  and  ask whether 
you  have  no  thought  for  the  sorrow  and misery  of  his  people.  They  aided  you  in 
your  distress,  and  in  recompense  you  have  thus  far  brought  ruin  only,  though 
doubtless undesigned." 
Now  these were  fair words and  true,  if proudly and grimly  spoken; and Bilbo 
thought  that Thorin would at once admit what  justice was  in  them. He did not, of 
course,  expect  that  any one would remember that it was he who discovered all by 
himself the dragon's weak spot; and that was just as well, for no one ever did. But 
also he did not reckon with the power that gold has upon which a dragon has long 

####-brooded,  nor with  dwarvish  hearts. Long hours  in  the past days Thorin had  spent 
in the treasury, and the lust of it was heavy on him. Though he had hunted chiefly 
for  the Arkenstone, yet he had  an  eye  for many  another wonderful  thing  that was 
lying there, about which were wound old memories of the labours and the sorrows 
of his race. 
"You  put  your worst  cause  last  and  in  the  chief  place," Thorin  answered.  "To 
the treasure of my people no man has a claim, because Smaug who stole it from us 
also  robbed  him  of  life  or  home.  The  treasure  was  not  his  that  his  evil  deeds 
should  be  amended  with  a  share  of  it.  The  price  of  the  goods  and  the  assistance 
that we  received of  the Lake-men we will fairly pay-in due time. But nothing will 
we  give,  not  even  a  loaf's  worth,  under  threat  of  force. While  an  armed host  lies 
before our doors, we look on you as foes and thieves. 
"It is in my mind to ask what share of their inheritance you would have paid to 
our kindred, had you found the hoard unguarded and us slain." 
"A just question," replied Bard. "But you are not dead, and we are not robbers. 
Moreover  the  wealthy  may  have  pity  beyond  right  on  the  needy  that  befriended 
them when they were in want. And still my other claims remain unanswered." 
"I will  not  parley,  as  I  have  said, with  armed men  at my  gate. Nor  at all with 
the people of the Elvenking, whom I remember with small kindness. In this debate 
they have no place. Begone now ere our arrows fly! And if you would speak with 
me  again,  first  dismiss  the  elvish  host  to  the  woods  where  it  belongs,  and  then 
return, laying down your arms before you approach the threshold." 
"The Elvenking  is my  friend,  and  he  has  succoured  the  people  of  the Lake  in 
their need, though they had no claim but friendship on him," answered Bard. "We 
will  give  you  time  to  repent  your  words.  Gather  your  wisdom  ere  we  return!" 
Then he departed and went back to the camp. 
Ere  many  hours  were  past,  the  banner-bearers  returned,  and  trumpeters  stood 
forth and blew a blast: 
"In  the  name  of  Esgaroth  and  the  Forest,"  one  cried,  "we  speak  unto  Thorin 
Thrain's  son  Oakenshield,  calling  himself  the  King  under  the  Mountain,  and  we 
bid him consider well  the claims  that have been urged, or be declared our  foe. At 
the  least  he  shall  deliver  one  twelfth  portion  of  the  treasure  unto  Bard,  as  the 
dragon-slayer,  and  as  the  heir  of  Girion.  From  that  portion  Bard  will  himself 
contribute  to  the  aid  of  Esgaroth;  but  if  Thorin  would  have  the  friendship  and 
honour of the lands about, as his sires had of old, then he will give also somewhat 
of his own  for  the comfort of  the men of  the Lake." Then Thorin seized a bow of 

####-horn  and  shot  an  arrow  at  the  speaker.  It  smote  into  his  shield  and  stuck  there 
quivering. 
'"Since  such  is  your  answer,"  he  called  in  return,  "I  declare  the  Mountain 
besieged. You shall not depart from it, until you call on your side for a truce and a 
parley. We will bear no weapons against you, but we leave you to your gold. You 
may eat that, if you will!" 
With  that  the  messengers  departed  swiftly,  and  the  dwarves  were  left  to 
consider  their  case. So grim had Thorin become, that even if they had wished, the 
others  would  not  have  dared  to  find  fault  with  him;  but  indeed  most  of  them 
seemed  to  share  his mind-except perhaps old fat Bombur and Fili and Kili. Bilbo, 
of course, disapproved of  the whole  turn of affairs. He had by now had more than 
enough of the Mountain, and being besieged inside it was not at all to his taste. 
"The whole place still stinks of dragon," he grumbled to himself, "and it makes 
me sick. And cram is beginning simply to stick in my throat." 

####-<h4>Chapter 16</h4> <br> 

A Thief in the Night 

 
Now the days passed slowly and wearily. Many of the dwarves spent their time 
piling  and  ordering  the  treasure;  and  now  Thorin  spoke  of  the  Arkenstone  of 
Thrain, and bade them eagerly to look for it in every comer.  
"For the Arkenstone of my father," he said, "is worth more than a river of gold 
in  itself,  and  to me  it  is  beyond  price.  That  stone  of  all  the  treasure  I  name  unto 
myself, and I will be avenged on anyone who finds it and withholds it." 
Bilbo heard these words and he grew afraid, wondering what would happen, if 
the stone was found-wrapped in an old bundle of tattered oddments that he used as 
a pillow. All the same he did not speak of it, for as the weariness of the days grew 
heavier, the beginnings of a plan had come into his little head. 
Things had gone on like this for some time, when the ravens brought news that 
Dain and more than five hundred dwarves, hurrying from the Iron Hills, were now 
within about two days' march of Dale, coming from the North-East. 
"But  they  cannot  reach  the  Mountain  unmarked,"  said  Róac,  "and  I  fear  lest 
there  be  battle  in  the  valley.  I  do  not  call  this  counsel  good.  Though  they  are  a 
grim  folk,  they  are  not  likely  to  overcome  the  host  that  besets  you;  and  even  if 
they  did  so, what will  you gain? Winter and snow is hastening behind them. How 
shall you be  fed without  the  friendship and goodwill of  the  lands about you? The 
treasure is likely to be your death, though the dragon is no more!"' 
But  Thorin  was  not moved.  "Winter  and  snow  will  bite both men and elves," 
he said, "and they may find their dwelling in the Waste grievous to bear. With my 
friends behind  them and winter upon  them,  they will perhaps be  in softer mood  to 
parley with." 
That night Bilbo made up his mind. The sky was black and moonless. As soon 
as  it  was  full  dark,  he  went  to  a  corner  of  an  inner  chamber  just  within  the  gate 
and drew from his bundle a rope, and also the Arkenstone wrapped in a rag. Then 
he  climbed  to  the  top  of  the  wall.  Only  Bombur  was  there,  for  it  was  his  turn to 
watch, and the dwarves kept only one watchman at a time. 
"It is mighty cold!" said Bombur. "I wish we could have a fire up here as they 
have in the camp!" 
"It is warm enough inside," said Bilbo. 

####-"I  daresay;  but  I  am  bound  here  till  midnight,"  grumbled  the  fat  dwarf.  "A 
sorry  business  altogether.  Not  that  I  venture  to  disagree  with  Thorin,  may  his 
beard grow ever longer; yet he was ever a dwarf with a stiff neck." 
"Not as stiff as my legs," said Bilbo. "I am tired of stairs and stone passages. I 
would give a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes." 
"I would give a good deal for the feel of a strong drink in my throat, and for a 
soft bed after a good supper!" 
"I  can't  give  you  those,  while  the  siege  is  going  on.  But  it  is  long  since  I 
watched,  and  I  will  take  your  turn  for  you,  if  you  like.  There  is  no  sleep  in  me 
tonight." 
  "You  are  a  good  fellow,  Mr.  Baggins,  and  I  will  take  your  offer  kindly.  If 
there  should  be  anything  to  note,  rouse me  first, mind  you!  I will  lie  in  the  inner 
chamber to the left, not far away." 
"Off you go!" said Bilbo. "I will wake you at midnight, and you can wake the 
next watchman." As soon as Bombur had gone, Bilbo put on his ring, fastened his 
rope,  slipped  down  over  the wall,  and was  gone. He  had  about  five  hours  before 
him.  Bombur  would  sleep  (he  could  sleep  at  any  time,  and  ever  since  the 
adventure  in  the  forest he was  always  trying  to  recapture  the beautiful dreams he 
had then); and all the others were busy with Thorin. It was unlikely that any, even 
Fili  or  Kili,  would  come out on  the wall until  it was  their  turn.  It was very dark, 
and  the  road  after  a  while,  when  he  left  the  newly made  path  and  climbed  down 
towards the lower course of the stream, was strange to him. At last he came to the 
bend  where  he  had  to  cross  the  water,  if  he  was  to  make  for  the  camp,  as  he 
wished. The bed of the stream was there shallow but already broad, and fording it 
in the dark was not easy for the little hobbit. He was nearly across when he missed 
his  footing  on  a  round  stone  and  fell  into  the  cold  water  with  a  splash.  He  had 
barely  scrambled  out  on  the  far  bank,  shivering  and  spluttering,  when  up  came 
elves in the gloom with bright lanterns and searched for the cause of the noise. 
"That  was  no  fish!"  one  said.  "There  is  a  spy  about.  Hide  your  lights! They 
will help him more  than us,  if  it  is  that queer  little creature  that  is said  to be  their 
servant." 
"Servant,  indeed!"  snorted  Bilbo;  and  in  the  middle  of  his  snort  he  sneezed 
loudly, and the elves immediately gathered towards the sound. 
"Let's  have  a  light!"  he  said.  "I  am  here,  if  you want me!"  and  he  slipped  off 
his ring, and popped from behind a rock. 

####-They seized him quickly, in spite of their surprise. "Who are you? Are you the 
dwarves' hobbit? What are you doing? How did you get so far past our sentinels?" 
they asked one after another.  
"I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins," he answered, "companion of Thorin, if you want to 
know. I know your king well by sight, though perhaps he doesn't know me to look 
at. But Bard will remember me, and it is Bard I particularly want to see." 
"Indeed!" said they, "and what may be your business?"  
"Whatever  it  is,  it's my own, my good  elves. But  if you wish  ever  to get back 
to  your  own  woods  from  this  cold  cheerless  place,"  he  answered  shivering,  "you 
will  take me  along  quiet  to a fire, where I can dry-and then you will let me speak 
to your chiefs as quick as may be. I have only an hour or two to spare." 
That is how it came about that some two hours after his escape from the Gate, 
Bilbo  was  sitting  beside  a  warm  fire  in  front  of  a  large  tent,  and  there  sat  too, 
gazing curiously at him, both the Elvenking and Bard. A hobbit in elvish armour, 
partly wrapped in an old blanket, was something new to them. 
"Really you know," Bilbo was  saying  in his best business manner,  "things  are 
impossible. Personally I am tired of the whole affair. I wish I was back in the West 
in  my  own  home,  where  folk  are  more  reasonable.  But  I  have  an  interest  in  this 
matter-one  fourteenth share,  to be precise, according  to a  letter, which  fortunately 
I believe I have kept." He drew from a pocket in his old jacket (which he still wore 
over his mail), crumpled and much folded, Thorin's letter that had been put under 
the clock on his mantelpiece in May! 
"A share in the profits, mind you," he went on. "I am aware of that. Personally 
I am only too ready to consider all your claims carefully, and deduct what is right 
from  the  total  before  putting  in my  own  claim.  However  you  don't  know  Thorin 
Oakenshield as well as I do now. I assure you, he is quite ready to sit on a heap of 
gold and starve, as long as you sit here." 
"Well, let him!" said Bard. "Such a fool deserves to starve." 
"Quite  so,"  said  Bilbo.  "I  see  your  point  of  view.  At  the  same  time  winter  is 
coming  on  fast. Before  long  you will  be  having  snow  and what not, and supplies 
will  be  difficult  –  even  for  elves  I  imagine.  Also  there  will  be  other  difficulties. 
You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of the Iron Hills?" 
"We have, a long time ago; but what has he got to do with us?" asked the king. 
"I  thought  as much.  I  see  I  have  some  information  you  have  not  got.  Dain,  I 
may  tell  you,  is  now  less  than  two  days' march  off,  and  has  at  least  five  hundred 
grim  dwarves  with  him  –  a  good  many  of  them  have  had  experience  in  the 

####-dreadful  dwarf  and  goblin  wars,  of  which  you  have  no  doubt  heard. When  they 
arrive there may be serious trouble." 
"Why  do  you  tell  us  this?  Are  you  betraying  your  friends,  or  are  you 
threatening us?" asked Bard grimly.  
"My  dear  Bard!"  squeaked  Bilbo.  "Don't  be  so  hasty!  I  never  met  such 
suspicious folk! I am merely trying to avoid trouble for all concerned. Now I will 
make you an offer!!" 
"Let us hear it!" they said. 
"You may  see  it!"  said  he.  "It  is  this!"  and  he  drew  forth  the Arkenstone,  and 
threw away the wrapping. 
The Elvenking himself, whose eyes were used to things of wonder and beauty, 
stood up in amazement. Even Bard gazed marvelling at it in silence. It was as if a 
globe had been  filled with moonlight and hung before  them  in a net woven of  the 
glint of frosty stars. 
"This  is  the  Arkenstone  of  Thrain,"  said  Bilbo,  "the  Heart  of  the  Mountain; 
and  it  is  also  the  heart  of  Thorin.  He  values  it  above  a  river  of  gold.  I  give  it  to 
you.  It  will  aid  you  in  your  bargaining."  Then  Bilbo,  not  without  a  shudder,  not 
without a glance of longing, handed the marvellous stone to Bard, and he held it in 
his hand, as though dazed. 
"But how is it yours to give?" he asked at last with an effort. 
"O  well!"  said  the  hobbit  uncomfortably.  "It  isn't  exactly;  but,  well,  I  am 
willing  to  let  it  stand  against  all my claim, don't you know. I may be a burglar-or 
so  they  say: personally  I never  really  felt  like one-but I am an honest one, I hope, 
more  or  less.  Anyway  I  am  going  back  now,  and  the  dwarves  can  do  what  they 
like to me. I hope you will find it useful." 
The Elvenking looked at Bilbo with a new wonder.  
"Bilbo  Baggins!"  he  said.  "You  are  more  worthy  to  wear  the  armour  of  elf-
princes  than  many  that  have  looked  more  comely  in  it.  But  I  wonder  if  Thorin 
Oakenshield will see it so. I have more knowledge of dwarves  in general than you 
have perhaps. I advise you to remain with us, and here you shall be honoured and 
thrice welcome." 
"Thank you very much I am sure," said Bilbo with a bow. "But I don't think I 
ought to leave my friends like this, after all we have gone through together. And I 
promised  to  wake  old  Bombur  at  midnight,  too!  Really  I  must  be  going,  and 
quickly." 
Nothing  they  could  say  would  stop  him;  so  an  escort  was  provided  for  him, 
and  as  he  went  both  the  king  and  Bard  saluted  him  with  honour.  As  they  passed 

####-through  the  camp  an  old  man  wrapped  in  a  dark  cloak,  rose  from  a  tent  door 
where he was sitting and came towards them. 
"Well  done!  Mr.  Baggins!"  he  said,  clapping  Bilbo  on  the  back.  "There  is 
always more about you than anyone expects!" It was Gandalf. 
For the first time for many a day Bilbo was really delighted. But there was no 
time for all the questions that he immediately wished to ask. 
"All  in  good  time!"  said  Gandalf.  "Things  are  drawing  towards  the  end  now, 
unless  I  am  mistaken.  There  is  an  unpleasant  time  just  in  front  of  you;  but  keep 
your heart up! You may  come  through  all  right. There  is news brewing  that  even 
the ravens have not heard. Good night!" 
Puzzled  but  cheered.  Bilbo  hurried  on.  He  was  guided  to  a  safe  ford  and  set 
across  dry,  and  then  he  said  farewell  to  the  elves  and  climbed  carefully  back 
towards the Gate. Great weariness began to come over him; but it was well before 
midnight when he  clambered up  the  rope  again  –  it was  still where he had  left  it. 
He untied  it and hid  it, and  then he sat down on the wall and wondered anxiously 
what would happen next. 
At  midnight  he  woke  up  Bombur;  and  then  in  turn  rolled  himself  up  in  his 
corner,  without  listening  to  old  dwarfs  thanks  (which  he  felt  he  had  hardly 
earned).  He  was  soon  fast  asleep  forgetting  all  his  worries  till  the  morning.  As 
matter of fact he was dreaming of eggs and bacon. 

####-<h4>Chapter 17</h4> <br> 

The Clouds Burst 

 
Next  day  the  trumpets  rang  early  in  the  camp. Soon  a  single  runner was  seen 
hurrying  along  the  narrow  path.  At  a  distance  he  stood  and  hailed  them,  asking 
whether Thorin would now listen to another embassy, since new tidings had come 
to hand, and matters were changed. 
"That will be Dain!" said Thorin when he heard. "They will have got wind of 
his  coming.  I  thought  that would  alter  their mood! Bid them come few in number 
and weaponless, and I will hear," he called to the messenger.  
About  midday  the  banners  of  the  Forest  and  the  Lake  were  seen  to  be  borne 
forth  again.  A  company  of  twenty  was  approaching.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
narrow  way  they  laid  aside  sword  and  spear,  and  came  on  towards  the  Gate. 
Wondering, the dwarves saw that among them were both Bard and the Elvenking, 
before whom an old man wrapped in cloak and hood bore a strong casket of iron-
bound wood. 
"Hail Thorin!" said Bard. "Are you still of the same mind?" 
"My mind does not change with the rising and setting of a few suns," answered 
Thorin. "Did you come to ask me idle questions? Still the elf-host has not departed 
as  I  bade! Till  then  you  come  in  vain  to  bargain with me."  "Is  there  then nothing 
for which you would yield any of your gold?" 
"Nothing that you or your friends have to offer." 
"What of the Arkenstone of Thrain?" said he, and at the same moment the old 
man  opened  the  casket  and  held  aloft  the  jewel.  The  light  leapt  from  his  hand, 
bright and white in the morning. 
Then Thorin was stricken dumb with amazement and confusion. No one spoke 
for  a  long while. Thorin  at  length broke  the  silence,  and his voice was  thick with 
wrath. "That stone was my father's, and is mine," he said. "Why should I purchase 
my  own?"  But  wonder  overcame  him  and  he  added:  "But  how  came  you  by  the 
heirloom of my house-if there is need to ask such a question of thieves?" 
"We  are  not  thieves," Bard  answered.  "Your  own we will  give  back  in  return 
for our own." 
'How came you by it?" shouted Thorin in gathering rage. 
"I gave it them!" squeaked Bilbo, who was peeping over the wall, by now, in a 
dreadful fright. 

####-"You!  You!"  cried  Thorin,  turning  upon  him  and  grasping  him  with  both 
hands.  "You  miserable  hobbit!  You  undersized-burglar!"  he  shouted  at  a  loss  for 
words, and he shook poor Bilbo like a rabbit. 
"By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! Curse him for his choice of 
you! May his beard wither! As for you I will throw you to the rocks!" he cried and 
lifted Bilbo in his arms. 
"Stay! Your wish is granted!" said a voice. The old man with the casket threw 
aside  his  hood  and  cloak.  "Here  is  Gandalf!  And  none  too  soon  it  seems.  If  you 
don't  like my Burglar, please don't damage him. Put him down,  and  listen first  to 
what he has to say!" 
"You  all  seem  in  league!"  said  Thorin  dropping  Bilbo  on  the  top  of  the wall. 
"Never  again will  I  have  dealings with  any wizard  or  his  friends. What  have  you 
to say, you descendant of rats?" 
"Dear  me!  Dear  me!"  said  Bilbo.  "I  am  sure  this  is  all  very  uncomfortable. 
You may remember saying that I might choose my own fourteenth share? Perhaps 
I took it too literally –1 have been told that dwarves are sometimes politer in word 
than  in  deed.  The  time  was,  all  the  same,  when  you  seemed  to  think  that  I  had 
been of some service. Descendant of rats, indeed! Is this ail the service of you and 
your family that I was promised. Thorin? Take it that I have disposed of my share 
as I wished, and let it go at that!" 
"I will,"  said Thorin  grimly.  "And  I will  let  you  go  at  that-and may we never 
meet again!" Then he turned and spoke over the wall. "I am betrayed," he said. "It 
was rightly guessed that I could not forbear to redeem the Arkenstone, the treasure 
of my house. For it I will give one fourteenth share of the hoard in silver and gold, 
setting  aside  the  gems;  but  that  shall  be  accounted  the  promised  share  of  this 
traitor, and with that reward he shall depart, and you can divide it as you will. He 
will  get  little  enough,  I  doubt  not.  Take  him,  if  you  wish  him  to  live;  and  no 
friendship of mine goes with him. 
"Get down now to your friends!" he said to Bilbo, "or I will throw you down." 
"What about the gold and silver?" asked Bilbo. 
"That shall follow after, as can be arranged," said he. 
"Get down!" 
"Until then we keep the stone," cried Bard. 
"You are not making a very splendid figure as King under the Mountain," said 
Gandalf. "But things may change yet." 

####-"They may indeed," said Thorin. And already, so strong was the bewilderment 
of  the  treasure upon him, he was pondering whether by the help of Dain he might 
not recapture the Arkenstone and withhold the share of the reward. 
And  so  Bilbo  was  swung  down  from  the  wall,  and  departed  with  nothing  for 
all his trouble, except the armour which Thorin had given him already. More than 
one of the dwarves 'in their hearts felt shame and pity at his going. 
"Farewell!" he cried to them. "We may meet again as friends." 
"Be  off!"  called  Thorin.  "You  have  mail  upon  you,  which  was  made  by  my 
folk,  and  is  too  good  for  you.  It  cannot  be  pierced  .by  arrows;  but  if  you  do  not 
hasten, I will sting your miserable feet. So be swift!" 
"Not so hasty!" said Bard. "We will give you until tomorrow. At noon we will 
return,  and  see  if  you  have  brought  from  the  hoard  the  portion  that  is  to  be  set 
against  the  stone.  If  that  is  done  without  deceit,  then  we  will  depart,  and  the  elf-
host will go back to the Forest. In the meanwhile farewell!" 
With  that  they  went  back  to  the  camp;  but  Thorin  sent  messengers  by  Róac 
telling Dain of what had passed, and bidding him come with wary speed. 
That day passed and the night. The next day the wind shifted west, and the air 
was  dark  and  gloomy.  The  morning  was  still  early  when  a  cry  was  heard  in  the 
camp.  Runners  came  in  to  report  that  a  host  of  dwarves  had  appeared  round  the 
eastern spur of  the Mountain and was now hastening  to Dale. Dain had come. He 
had  hurried  on  through  the  night,  and  so  had  come  upon  them  sooner  than  they 
had expected. Each one of his folk was clad in a hauberk of steel mail that hung to 
his  knees,  and  his  legs were  covered with  hose  of  a  fine  and  flexible metal mesh, 
the secret of whose making was possessed by Dain's people. 
The  dwarves  are  exceedingly  strong  for  their  height,  but  most  of  these  were 
strong  even  for  dwarves.  In  battle  they  wielded  heavy  two-handed mattocks;  but 
each of  them had also a  short broad  sword at his  side and a  round  shield  slung at 
his  back.  Their  beards  were  forked  and  plaited  and  thrust  into  their  belts.  Their 
caps  were  of  iron  and  they  were  shod  with  iron,  and  their  faces  were  grim. 
Trumpets  called  men  and  elves  to  arms.  Before  long  the  dwarves  could  be  seen 
coming  up  the  valley  at  a  great  pace.  They  halted  between  the  river  and  the 
eastern  spur;  but  a  few  held  on  their  way,  and  crossing  the  river  drew  near  the 
camp;  and  there  they  laid  down  their weapons  and  held  up  their  hands  in  sign  of 
peace. Bard went out to meet them, and with him went Bilbo. 
"We  are  sent  from  Dain  son  of  Nain,"  they  said  when  questioned.  "We  are 
hastening  to our kinsmen  in  the Mountain, since we learn that the kingdom of old 
is  renewed. But who  are  you  that  sit  in  the  plain  as  foes  before  defended walls?" 

####-This, of. course, in the polite and rather old-fashioned language of such occasions, 
meant simply: "You have no business  here. We are going on, so make way or we 
shall fight you!" They meant to push on between the Mountain and the loop of the 
river, for the narrow land there did not seem to be strongly guarded. 
Bard,  of  course,  refused  to  allow  the  dwarves  to  go  straight  on  to  the 
Mountain. He was  determined  to wait  until  the  gold  and  silver  had  been  brought 
out in exchange for the Arkenstone: for he did not believe that this would be done, 
if  once  the  fortress  was manned  with  so  large  and  warlike  a  company.  They  had 
brought with  them a great store of supplies; for  the dwarves can carry very heavy 
burdens,  and  nearly  all  of  Dain's  folks,  in  spite  of  their  rapid  march,  bore  huge 
packs  on  their  backs  in  addition  to  their  weapons.  They  would  stand  a  siege  for 
weeks,  and  by  that  time yet more dwarves might  come,  and yet more,  for Thorin 
had many relatives. Also they would be able to reopen and guard some other gate, 
so that the besiegers would have to encircle the whole mountain; and for that they 
had not sufficient numbers. 
These  were,  in  fact,  precisely  their  plans  (for  the  raven-messengers  had  been 
busy between Thorin and Dain); but  for  the moment  the way was barred, so after 
angry  words  the  dwarf-messengers  retired  muttering  in  their  beards.  Bard  then 
sent messengers  at  once  to  the Gate; but  they  found no gold or payment. Arrows 
came forth as soon as they were within shot, and they hastened back in dismay. In 
the  camp  all  was  now  astir,  as  if  for  battle;  for  the  dwarves  of  Dain  were 
advancing along the eastern bank. 
"Fools!"  laughed  Bard,  "to  come  thus  beneath  the  Mountain's  arm!  They  do 
not understand war above ground, whatever they may know of battle in the mines. 
There  are many  of  our  archers  and  spearmen  now  hidden  in  the  rocks  upon  their 
right  flank. Dwarf-mail may  be  good,  but  they will  soon be hard put  to  it. Let us 
set on them now from both sides, before they are fully rested!" 
But  the  Elvenking  said:  "Long will  I  tarry,  ere  I  begin  this war  for  gold.  The 
dwarves cannot press us, unless we will, or do anything  that we cannot mark. Let 
us  hope  still  for  something  that  will  bring  reconciliation.  Our  advantage  in 
numbers will be enough, if in the end it must come to unhappy blows." 
But he reckoned without the dwarves. The knowledge that the Arkenstone was 
in  the  hands  of  the  besiegers  burned  in  their  thoughts;  also  they  guessed  the 
hesitation of Bard and his friends, and resolved to strike while they debated. 
Suddenly  without  a  signal  they  sprang  silently  forward  to  attack.  Bows 
twanged and arrows whistled; battle was about to be joined. 

####-Still  more  suddenly  a  darkness  came  on  with  dreadful  swiftness!  A  black 
cloud  hurried  over  the  sky. Winter  thunder  on  a wild wind  rolled  roaring  up  and 
rumbled  in  the  Mountain,  and  lightning  lit  its  peak.  And  beneath  the  thunder 
another  blackness  could  be  seen  whirling  forward;  but  it  did  not  come  with  the 
wind,  it  came  from  the  North,  like  a  vast  cloud  of  birds,  so  dense  that  no  light 
could be seen between their wings. 
"Halt!"  cried  Gandalf,  who  appeared  suddenly,  and  stood  alone,  with  arms 
uplifted, between  the advancing dwarves and  the  ranks awaiting  them. "Halt!" he 
called  in  a  voice  like  thunder,  and  his  staff  blazed  forth  with  a  flash  like  the 
lightning.  "Dread  has  come  upon  you  all!  Alas!  it  has  come  more  swiftly  than  I 
guessed. The Goblins  are upon you! Bolg*  of the North is coming. O Dain! whose 
father  you  slew  in  Moria.  Behold!  the  bats  are  above  his  army  like  a  sea  of 
locusts. They ride upon wolves and Wargs are in their train!" 
Amazement  and  confusion  fell  upon  them  all.  Even  as  Gandalf  had  been 
speaking  the  darkness  grew.  The  dwarves  halted  and  gazed  at  the  sky.  The  elves 
cried out with many voices. 
"Come!" called Gandalf.  "There  is yet  time  for council. Let Dain  son of Nain 
come swiftly to us!" 
 
So  began  a  battle  that  none  had  expected; and  it was called  the Battle of Five 
Armies,  and  it  was  very  terrible.  Upon  one  side  were  the  Goblins  and  the  wild 
Wolves, and upon  the other were Elves and Men and Dwarves. This  is how  it  fell 
out.  Ever  since  the  fall  of  the Great Goblin  of  the Misty Mountains  the hatred of 
their  race  for  the  dwarves  had  been  rekindled  to  fury. Messengers  had  passed  to 
and fro between all their cities, colonies and strongholds; for they resolved now to 
win  the  dominion  of  the  North.  Tidings  they  had  gathered  in  secret  ways; and  in 
all  the  mountains  there  was  a  forging  and  an  arming.  Then  they  marched  and 
gathered by hill  and valley, going  ever by  tunnel or under dark, until  around  and 
beneath the great mountain Gundabad of the North, where was their capital, a vast 
host  was  assembled  ready  to  sweep  down  in  time  of  storm  unawares  upon  the 
South. Then  they  learned of  the death of Smaug,  and  joy was  in  their hearts:  and 
they hastened night  after night  through  the mountains,  and  came  thus  at  last on  a 
sudden  from  the  North  hard  on  the  heels  of  Dain.  Not  even  the  ravens  knew  of 
their  coming  until  they  came  out  in  the  broken  lands  which  divided  the  Lonely 
Mountain from the hills behind. How much Gandalf knew cannot be said, but it is 
plain that he had not expected this sudden assault. 

                                                             
*
 Son of Azog 

####-This is the plan that he made in council with the Elvenking and with Bard; and 
with  Dain,  for  the  dwarf-lord  now  joined  them:  the  Goblins  were  the  foes  of  all, 
and at  their coming all other quarrels were  forgotten. Their only hope was  to  lure 
the  goblins  into  the  valley  between  the  arms  of  the Mountain;  and  themselves  to 
man  the  great  spurs  that  struck  south  and  east. Yet  this would  be  perilous,  if  the 
goblins  were  in  sufficient  numbers  to  overrun  the  Mountain  itself,  and  so  attack 
them also  from behind and above; but there was no time for make any other plan, 
or to summon any help. 
Soon  the  thunder  passed,  rolling  away  to  the  South-East;  but  the  bat-cloud 
came,  flying  lower,  over  the  shoulder  of  the  Mountain,  and  whirled  above  them 
shutting out the light and filling them with dread. 
"To  the  Mountain!"  called  Bard.  "To  the  Mountain!  Let  us  take  our  places 
while there is yet time!" 
On  the Southern spur,  in  its  lower slopes and  in  the  rocks at  its  feet,  the Elves 
were  set;  on  the  Eastern  spur  were men  and  dwarves.  But  Bard  and  some  of  the 
nimblest of men and elves climbed  to  the height of  the Eastern  shoulder  to gain a 
view  to  the North. Soon  they could see  the  lands before  the Mountain's  feet black 
with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the vanguard swirled round the spur's end and 
came  rushing  into  Dale.  These  were  the  swiftest  wolf-riders,  and  already  their 
cries  and  howls  rent  the  air  afar.  A  few  brave  men  were  strung  before  them  to 
make  a  feint  of  resistance,  and many  there  fell  before  the  rest  drew  back  and fled 
to  either  side.  As  Gandalf  had  hoped,  the  goblin  army  had  gathered  behind  the 
resisted  vanguard,  and  poured  now  in  rage  into  the  valley,  driving  wildly  up 
between  the  arms  of  the  Mountain,  seeking  for  the  foe.  Their  banners  were 
countless, black and red, and they came on like a tide in fury and disorder.  
It  was  a  terrible  battle.  The  most  dreadful  of  all  Bilbo's  experiences,  and  the 
one which  at  the  time he hated most  – which is to say it was the one he was most 
proud  of,  and  most  fond  of  recalling  long  afterwards,  although  he  was  quite 
unimportant in it. Actually I must say he put on his ring early in the business, and 
vanished  from  sight,  if  not  from  all  danger.  A  magic  ring  of  that  sort  is  not  a 
complete  protection  in  a  goblin  charge,  nor  does  it  stop  flying  arrows  and  wild 
spears;  but  it  does  help  in  getting  out  of  the way,  and  it  prevents  your  head  from 
being specially chosen for a sweeping stroke by a goblin swordsman. 
The  elves  were  the  first  to  charge.  Their  hatred  for  the  goblins  is  cold  and 
bitter. Their spears and swords shone  in  the gloom with a gleam of chill flame, so 
deadly  was  the  wrath  of  the  hands  that  held  them.  As  soon  as  the  host  of  their 
enemies was dense  in  the valley,  they sent against  it a shower of arrows, and each 

####-flickered  as  it  fled  as  if with  stinging  fire.  Behind  the  arrows  a  thousand  of  their 
spearmen  leapt  down  and  charged.  The  yells  were  deafening.  The  rocks  were 
stained  black  with  goblin  blood.  Just  as  the  goblins  were  recovering  from  the 
onslaught  and  the  elf-charge was halted,  there  rose  from across  the valley a deep-
throated  roar. With  cries  of  "Moria!"  and  "Dain,  Dain!"  the  dwarves  of  the  Iron 
Hills  plunged  in,  wielding  their  mattocks,  upon  the  other  side;  and  beside  them 
came  the  men  of  the  Lake  with  long  swords.  Panic  came  upon  the Goblins;  and 
even as they turned to meet this new attack, the elves charged again with renewed 
numbers. Already many of  the goblins were  flying back down  the  river  to  escape 
from the trap: and many of their own wolves were turning upon them and rending 
the  dead  and  the  wounded.  Victory  seemed  at  hand,  when  a  cry  rang  out  on  the 
heights above. 
Goblins  had  scaled  the Mountain  from  the  other  side  and  already many were 
on the slopes above the Gate, and others were streaming down recklessly, heedless 
of  those  that  fell  screaming  from  cliff  and  precipice,  to  attack  the  spurs  from 
above. Each of these could be reached by paths that ran down from the main mass 
of  the Mountain  in  the  centre;  and  the  defenders  had  too  few  to  bar  the  way  for 
long. Vi ctory now vanished from hope. They had only stemmed the first onslaught 
of the black tide. 
Day drew on. The goblins gathered again  in  the valley. There a host of Wargs 
came  ravening  and  with  them  came  the  bodyguard  of  Bolg,  goblins  of  huge  size 
with scimitars of steel. Soon actual darkness was coming into a stormy sky; while 
still  the great bats  swirled  about  the heads  and  ears of  elves  and men, or  fastened 
vampire-like  on  the  stricken.  Now  Bard  was  fighting  to  defend  the  Eastern  spur, 
and yet giving slowly back; and the elf-lords were at bay about their king upon the 
southern arm, near to the watch-post on Ravenhill. 
Suddenly  there  was  a  great  shout,  and  from  the  Gate  came  a  trumpet  call. 
They had forgotten Thorin! Part of  the wall, moved by  levers, fell outward with a 
crash  into  the  pool. Out  leapt  the King  under  the Mountain,  and  his  companions 
followed  him.  Hood  and  cloak  were  gone;  they  were  in  shining  armour,  and  red 
light  leapt  from  their  eyes.  In  the  gloom  the  great  dwarf  gleamed  like  gold  in  a 
dying fire. 
Rocks were buried down from on high by the goblins above; but they held on. 
leapt  down  to  the  falls'  foot,  and  rushed  forward  to  battle. Wolf  and  rider  fell  or 
fled before them. Thorin wielded his axe with mighty strokes, and nothing seemed 
to harm him. 

####-"To  me!  To  me!  Elves  and  Men!  To  me!  O  my  kinsfolk!"  he  cried,  and  his 
voice shook like a horn in the valley.  
Down, heedless of order, rushed all the dwarves of Dain to his help. Down too 
came  many  of  the  Lake-men,  for Bard  could  not  restrain  them;  and out upon  the 
other  side  came many  of  the  spearmen  of  the  elves. Once  again  the  goblins were 
stricken in the valley; and they were piled in heaps till Dale was dark and hideous 
with  their  corpses.  The  Wargs  were  scattered  and  Thorin  drove  right  against  the 
bodyguards  of  Bolg.  But  he  could  not  pierce  their  ranks.  Already  behind  him 
among the goblin dead lay many men and many dwarves, and many a fair elf that 
should  have  lived  yet  long  ages  merrily  in  the  wood.  And  as  the  valley  widened 
his onset grew ever slower. His numbers were too few. His flanks were unguarded. 
Soon  the  attackers  were  attacked,  and  they  were  forced  into  a  great  ring,  facing 
every  way,  hemmed  all  about  with  goblins  and  wolves  returning  to  the  assault. 
The bodyguard of Bolg came howling against them, and drove in upon their ranks 
like waves  upon  cliffs  of  sand.  Their  friends  could  not  help  them,  for  the  assault 
from  the Mountain was  renewed with  redoubled  force,  and  upon  either  side men 
and elves were being slowly beaten down. 
On  all  this  Bilbo  looked  with  misery.  He  had  taken  his  stand  on  Ravenhill 
among  the Elves-partly because  there was more chance of escape from  that point, 
and partly (with the more Tookish part of his mind) because if he was going to be 
in  a  last  desperate  stand,  he  preferred  on  the  whole  to  defend  the  Elvenking. 
Gandalf,  too,  I  may  say,  was  there,  sitting  on  the  ground  as  if  in  deep  thought, 
preparing,  I  suppose,  some  last  blast  of magic  before  the  end.  That  did  not  seem 
far off. "It will not be  long now,"  thought Bilbo, "before the goblins win the Gate, 
and  we  are  all  slaughtered  or  driven  down  and  captured.  Really  it  is  enough  to 
make  one  weep,  after  all  one  has  gone  through.  I  would  rather  old  Smaug  had 
been left with all the wretched treasure, than that these vile creatures should get it, 
and  poor  old Bombur,  and Balin  and  Fili  and Kili  and  all  the  rest  come  to  a  bad 
end;  and  Bard  too,  and  the  Lake-men  and  the  merry  elves.  Misery  me!  I  have 
heard  songs  of  many  battles,  and  I  have  always  understood  that  defeat  may  be 
glorious. It seems very uncomfortable, not to say distressing. I wish I was well out 
of it." 
The  clouds  were  torn  by  the  wind,  and  a  red  sunset  slashed  the West.  Seeing 
the  sudden  gleam  in  the  gloom  Bilbo  looked  round. He  gave  a  great  cry:  he  had 
seen  a  sight  that  made  his  heart  leap,  dark  shapes  small  yet  majestic  against  the 
distant glow.  
"The Eagles! The Eagles!" he shouted. "The Eagles are coming!" 

####-Bilbo's eyes were seldom wrong. The eagles were coming down the wind, line 
after line, in such a host as must have gathered from all the eyries of the North. 
"The  Eagles!  the  Eagles!"  Bilbo  cried,  dancing  and  waving  his  arms.  If  the 
elves could not see him they could hear him. Soon they too took up the cry, and it 
echoed  across  the  valley. Many wondering  eyes  looked up,  though as yet nothing 
could be seen except from the southern shoulders of the Mountain. 
"The Eagles!" cried Bilbo once more, but at that moment a stone hurtling from 
above smote heavily on his helm, and he fell with a crash and knew no more. 

####-<h4>Chapter 18</h4> <br> 

The Return Journey 

 
When Bilbo came  to himself, he was  literally by himself. He was  lying on  the 
flat stones of Ravenhill, and no one was near. A cloudless day, but cold, was broad 
above him. He was shaking, and as chilled as stone, but his head burned with fire. 
"Now I wonder what has happened?" he said to himself. "At any rate I am not 
yet one of the fallen heroes; but I suppose there is still time enough for that!" 
He  sat  up  painfully.  Looking  into  the  valley  he  could  see  no  living  goblins. 
After  a while as his head cleared a  little, he  thought he could see elves moving  in 
the  rocks  below.  He  rubbed  his  eyes.  Surely  there  was  a  camp  still  in  the  plain 
some  distance  off;  and  there  was  a  coming  and  going  about  the  Gate?  Dwarves 
seemed  to  be  busy  removing  the wall. But  all was deadly  still. There was no  call 
and  no  echo  of  a  song.  Sorrow  seemed  to  be  in  the  air.  "Victory  after  all,  I 
suppose!"  he  said,  feeling  his  aching  head.  "Well,  it  seems  a  very  gloomy 
business." 
Suddenly he was aware of a man climbing up and coming towards him. 
"Hullo there!" he called with a shaky voice. "Hullo there! What news?" 
"What  voice  is  it  that  speaks  among  the  stones?"  said  the  man  halting  and 
peering about him not far from where Bilbo sat. 
Then Bilbo remembered his ring! "Well I'm blessed!" said he. "This invisibility 
has  its  drawbacks  after  all.  Otherwise  I  suppose  I  might  have  spent  a  warm  and 
comfortable night in bed!" 
"It's me, Bilbo Baggins,  companion  of Thorin!"  he  cried,  hurriedly  taking  off 
the ring. 
"It  is  well  that  I  have  found  you!"  said  the  man  striding  forward.  "You  are 
needed and we have looked for you long. You would have been numbered among 
the  dead,  who  are many,  if  Gandalf  the  wizard  had  not  said  that  your  voice  was 
last  heard  in  this  place.  I  have  been  sent  to  look  here  for  the  last  time.  Are  you 
much hurt?" 
"A  nasty  knock  on  the  head,  I  think,"  said  Bilbo.  "But  I  have  a  helm  and  a 
hard skull. All the same I feel sick and my legs are like straws." 
"I  will  carry  you  down  to  the  camp  in  the  valley,"  said  the man,  and  picked 
him lightly up. 
The man was swift and sure-footed. It was not long before Bilbo was set down 
before  a  tent  in Dale;  and  there  stood Gandalf, with  his  arm  in  a  sling.  Even  the 

####-wizard had not escaped without a wound; and  there were  few unharmed in all the 
host. 
When Gandalf saw Bilbo, he was delighted. "Baggins!" he exclaimed. "Well I 
never! Alive after all – 1 am glad! I began to wonder if even your luck would see 
you through! A terrible business, and it nearly was disastrous. But other news can 
wait. Come!" he said more gravely. "You are called for;" and leading the hobbit he 
took him within the tent. 
"Hail! Thorin," he said as he entered. "I have brought him." 
There  indeed  lay  Thorin  Oakenshield,  wounded  with  many  wounds,  and  his 
rent  armour  and  notched  axe  were  cast  upon  the  floor.  He  looked  up  as  Bilbo 
came beside him. 
"Farewell,  good  thief,"  he  said.  "I  go  now  to  the  halls  of waiting  to  sit  beside 
my  fathers,  until  the world  is  renewed. Since  I  leave  now  all  gold  and  silver,  and 
go  where  it  is  of  little  worth,  I  wish  to  part  in  friendship  from  you,  and  I  would 
take back my words and deeds at the Gate." 
Bilbo  knelt  on  one  knee  filled  with  sorrow.  "Farewell,  King  under  the 
Mountain!"  he  said.  "This  is  a  bitter  adventure,  if  it  must  end  so;  and  not  a 
mountain  of  gold  can  amend  it. Yet  I  am  glad  that  I  have  shared  in  your  perils  – 
that has been more than any Baggins deserves." 
"No!" said Thorin. "There  is more  in you of good  than you know, child of  the 
kindly West. Some  courage  and  some wisdom, blended  in measure.  If more of us 
valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world. 
But sad or merry, I must leave it now. Farewell!" 
Then Bilbo  turned  away,  and  he went  by  himself,  and  sat  alone wrapped  in  a 
blanket, and, whether you believe it or not, he wept until his eyes were red and his 
voice was hoarse. He was a kindly little soul. Indeed it was long before he had the 
heart to make a joke again. "A mercy it is," he said at last to himself, "that I woke 
up when I did. I wish Thorin were living, but I am glad that we parted in kindness. 
You  are  a  fool,  Bilbo  Baggins,  and  you made  a  great mess  of  that  business with 
the stone; and there was a battle, in spite of all your efforts to buy peace and quiet, 
but I suppose you can hardly be blamed for that." 
All  that  had  happened  after  he  was  stunned,  Bilbo  learned  later;  but  it  gave 
him more sorrow than joy, and he was now weary of his adventure. He was aching 
in  his  bones  for  the  homeward  journey. That,  however, was  a  little  delayed, so  in 
the meantime I will tell something of events. The Eagles had long had suspicion of 
the  goblins'  mustering;  from  their  watchfulness  the  movements  in  the  mountains 
could not be altogether hid. So  they  too had gathered  in great numbers, under  the 

####-great  Eagle  of  the Misty Mountains;  and  at  length  smelling  battle  from  afar  they 
had come  speeding down  the gale  in  the nick of  time. They  it was who dislodged 
the  goblins  from  the  mountain-slopes,  casting  them  over  precipices,  or  driving 
them down shrieking and bewildered among their foes. It was not long before they 
had  freed  the  Lonely  Mountain,  and  elves  and  men  on  either  side  of  the  valley 
could come at last to the help of the battle below.  
But even with the Eagles they were still outnumbered. 
In  that  last  hour  Beorn  himself  had  appeared  –  no  one  knew  how  or  from 
where. He  came  alone,  and  in  bear's  shape;  and  he  seemed  to  have  grown  almost 
to  giant-size  in  his wrath. The  roar  of  his  voice was  like  drums  and  guns;  and  he 
tossed  wolves  and  goblins  from  his  path  like  straws  and  feathers.  He  fell  upon 
their  rear,  and  broke  like  a  clap  of  thunder  through  the  ring.  The  dwarves  were 
making  a  stand  still  about  their  lords  upon  a  low  rounded  hill.  Then  Beorn 
stooped and lifted Thorin, who had fallen pierced with spears, and bore him out of 
the  fray.  Swiftly  he  returned  and  his  wrath  was  redoubled,  so  that  nothing  could 
withstand  him,  and  no  weapon  seemed  to  bite  upon  him.  He  scattered  the 
bodyguard,  and  pulled  down Bolg  himself  and  crushed  him. Then  dismay  fell  on 
the  Goblins  and  they  fled  in  all  directions.  But  weariness  left  their  enemies  with 
the  coming  of  new  hope,  and  they  pursued  them  closely,  and  prevented  most  of 
them from escaping where they could. They drove many of them into the Running 
River, and such as fled south or west they hunted into the marshes about the Forest 
River;  and  there  the  greater  part  of  the  last  fugitives  perished,  while  those  that 
came  hardly  to  the Wood-elves'  realm  were  there  slain,  or  drawn  in  to  die  in  the 
trackless  dark  of  Mirkwood.  Songs  have  said  that  three  parts  of  the  goblin 
warriors of the North perished on that day, and the mountains had peace for many 
a year.  
Victory  had  been  assured  before  the  fall  of  night,  but  the  pursuit  was  still  on 
foot, when  Bilbo  returned  to  the  camp;  and not many were  in  the valley  save  the 
more grievously wounded. 
"Where are  the Eagles?" he asked Gandalf  that evening, as he  lay wrapped  in 
many warm blankets. 
"Some  are  in  the  hunt,"  said  the  wizard,  "but  most  have  gone  back  to  their 
eyries.  They  would  not  stay  here,  and  departed  with  the  first  light  of  morning. 
Dain has crowned their chief with gold, and sworn friendship with them for ever." 
"I  am  sorry.  I  mean,  I  should  have  liked  to  see  them  again,"  said  Bilbo 
sleepily;  "perhaps  I  shall  see  them  on  the  way  home.  I  suppose  I  shall  be  going 
home soon?" 

####-"As soon as you like," said the wizard. 
Actually it was some days before Bilbo really set out. 
They buried Thorin deep beneath the Mountain, and Bard laid the Arkenstone 
upon his breast. 
"There let it lie till the Mountain falls!" he said. "May it bring good fortune to 
all his  folk  that dwell here after!" Upon his  tomb  the Elvenking  then  laid Orcrist, 
the  elvish  sword  that  had  been  taken  from  Thorin  in  captivity.  It  is  said  in  songs 
that it gleamed ever in the dark if foes approached, and the fortress of the dwarves 
could  not  be  taken  by  surprise.  There  now  Dain  son  of  Nain  took  up  his  abode, 
and  he  became  King  under  the  Mountain,  and  in  time  many  other  dwarves 
gathered  to  his  throne  in  the  ancient  halls.  Of  the  twelve  companions  of  Thorin, 
ten  remained. Fili  and Kili  had  fallen  defending  him with  shield  and  body,  for  he 
was their mother's elder brother. The others remained with Dain; for Dain dealt his 
treasure well. There was,  of  course,  no  longer  any  question of dividing  the hoard 
in  such  shares  as had been planned,  to Balin  and Dwalin,  and Dori  and Nori  and 
Ori,  and  Oin  and  Gloin,  and  Bifur  and  Bofur  and  Bombur-or  to  Bilbo.  Yet  a 
fourteenth  share of  all  the  silver  and gold, wrought  and unwrought, was given up 
to  Bard;  for  Dain  said:  "We  will  honour  the  agreement  of  the  dead,  and  he  has 
now the Arkenstone in his keeping." 
Even  a  fourteenth  share  was  wealth  exceedingly  great,  greater  than  that  of 
many  mortal  kings.  From  that  treasure  Bard  sent  much  gold  to  the  Master  of 
Lake-town; and he rewarded his followers and friends freely. To the Elvenking he 
gave  the  emeralds  of  Girion,  such  jewels  as  he  most  loved,  which  Dain  had 
restored  to  him.  To  Bilbo  he  said:  "This  treasure  is  as  much  yours  as  it  is  mine; 
though  old  agreements  cannot  stand,  since  so  many  have  a  claim  in  its  winning 
and  defence.  Yet  even  though  you  were  willing  to  lay  aside  all  your  claim,  I 
should wish that the words of Thorin, of which he repented, should not prove true: 
that we should give you little. I would reward you most richly of all." 
"Very  kind  of  you,"  said  Bilbo.  "But  really  it  is  a  relief  to me. How  on  earth 
should  I  have  got  all  that  treasure  home  without  war  and  murder  all  along  the 
way,  I  don't  know. And  I  don't  know what  I  should  have done with  it when  I got 
home. I am sure it is better in your hands." 
In  the end he would only  take  two  small chests, one  filled with  silver, and  the 
other with gold, such as one strong pony could carry. "That will be quite as much 
as I can manage," said he. 
At last the time came for him to say good-bye to his friends. "Farewell, Balin!" 
he  said;  "and  farewell,  Dwalin;  and  farewell  Dori,  Nori,  Ori,  Oin,  Gloin,  Bifur, 

####-Bofur, and Bombur! May your beards never grow  thin!" And  turning  towards  the 
Mountain  he added: "Farewell Thorin Oakenshield! And Fili and Kili! May your 
memory never fade!" 
Then  the  dwarves  bowed  low  before  their  Gate,  but  words  stuck  in  their 
throats.  "Good-bye and good luck, wherever you fare!" said Balin at last. "If ever 
you  visit  us  again,  when  our  halls  are  made  fair  once  more,  then  the  feast  shall 
indeed be splendid!" 
"If  ever  you  are  passing my way,"  said Bilbo,  "don't wait  to  knock!  Tea  is  at 
four; but any of you are welcome at any time!" 
Then he turned away.  
The  elf-host  was  on  the  march;.  and  if  it  was  sadly  lessened,  yet  many  were 
glad,  for  now  the  northern  world  would  be  merrier  for  many  a  long  day.  The 
dragon  was  dead,  and  the  goblins  overthrown,  and  their  hearts  looked  forward 
after winter  to  a  spring  of  joy. Gandalf  and Bilbo  rode behind the Elvenking, and 
beside  them strode Beorn, once again  in man's shape, and he  laughed and sang  in 
a loud voice upon the road. So they went on until they drew near to the borders of 
Mirkwood, to the north of the place where the Forest River ran out. 
Then  they  halted,  for  the  wizard  and  Bilbo  would  not  enter  the  wood,  even 
though the king bade them stay a while in his halls. They intended to go along the 
edge of  the  forest, and  round  its northern end  in  the waste  that  lay between  it and 
the  beginning  of  the  Grey Mountains.  It  was  a  long  and  cheerless  road,  but  now 
that  the goblins were crushed,  it seemed safer  to  them  than  the dreadful pathways 
under the trees. Moreover Beorn was going that way too. 
"Farewell!  O  Elvenking!"  said  Gandalf.  "Merry  be  the  greenwood, while  the 
world is yet young! And merry be all your folk!" 
"Farewell!  O  Gandalf!"  said  the  king.  "May  you  ever  appear  where  you  are 
most  needed  and  least  expected!  The  oftener  you  appear  in  my  halls  the  better 
shall I be pleased!" 
"I beg of  you," said Bilbo stammering and standing on one foot, "to accept this 
gift!" and he brought out a necklace of  silver and pearls  that Dain had given him 
at their parting. 
"In what way have I earned such a gift, O hobbit?" said the king. 
"Well,  er,  I  thought,  don't  you  know,"  said  Bilbo  rather  confused,  "that,  er, 
some  little  return  should  be made  for  your,  er,  hospitality.  I mean  even  a  burglar 
has his feelings. I have drunk much of your wine and eaten much of your bread." 

####-"I will  take your gift, O Bilbo  the Magnificent!" said the king gravely. "And I 
name  you  elf-friend  and  blessed. May  your  shadow  never  grow  less  (or  stealing 
would be too easy)! Farewell!" 
Then  the  elves  turned  towards  the  Forest,  and  Bilbo  started  on  his  long  road 
home. 
He had many hardships and adventures before he got back. The Wild was still 
the Wild, and there were many other things in it in those days besides goblins; but 
he  was  well  guided  and  well  guarded-the  wizard  was  with  him,  and  Beorn  for 
much  of  the way-and  he was  never  in  great danger again. Anyway by mid-winter 
Gandalf  and Bilbo had  come  all  the way back,  along both  edges of  the Forest,  to 
the  doors  of Beorn's  house;  and  there  for  a while  they  both  stayed. Yule-tide was 
warm  and  merry  there;  and  men  came  from  far  and  wide  to  feast  at  Beorn's 
bidding.  The  goblins  of  the  Misty  Mountains  were  now  few  and  terrified,  and 
hidden  in  the deepest holes  they could  find; and  the Wargs had vanished  from  the 
woods,  so  that men went  abroad without  fear. Beorn  indeed became  a great  chief 
afterwards  in  those  regions  and  ruled  a wide  land between  the mountains  and  the 
wood; and it is said that for many generations the men of his line had the power of 
taking bear's shape, and some were grim men and bad, but most were in heart like 
Beorn,  if  less  in  size  and  strength.  In  their  day  the  last  goblins were  hunted  from 
the  Misty  Mountains  and  a  new  peace  came  over  the  edge  of  the  Wild.  It  was 
spring,  and  a  fair  one  with  mild  weathers  and  a  bright  sun,  before  Bilbo  and 
Gandalf  took  their  leave  at  last  of Beorn,  and  though  he  longed  for  home. Bilbo 
left with regret, for the flowers of the gardens of Beorn were m springtime no less 
marvellous  than  in high summer. At  last  they came up  the  long road, and reached 
the  very  pass  where  the  goblins  had  captured  them before. But  they came  to  that 
high  point  at morning,  and  looking  backward  they  saw  a  white  sun  shining  over 
the  out-stretched  lands.  There  behind  lay  Mirkwood,  blue  in  the  distance,  and 
darkly green at the nearer edge even in the spring. There far away was the Lonely 
Mountain  on  the  edge  of  eyesight.  On  its  highest  peak  snow  yet  unmelted  was 
gleaming pale. 
"So  comes  snow  after  fire,  and  even  dragons  have  their  ending!"  said  Bilbo, 
and he  turned his back on his adventure. The Tookish part was getting very tired, 
and  the  Baggins  was  daily  getting  stronger.  "I  wish  now  only  to  be  in  my  own 
arm-chair!" he said. 

####-<h4>Chapter 19</h4> <br> 

The Last Stage 

 
It was on May the First that the two came back at last to the brink of the valley 
of  Rivendell,  where  stood  the  Last  (or  the  First)  Homely  House.  Again  it  was 
evening,  their  ponies were  tired,  especially  the  one  that  carried  the  baggage;  and 
they all felt in need of rest. As they rode down the steep path, Bilbo heard the elves 
still  singing  in  the  trees,  as  if  they  had  not  stopped  since  he  left;  and  as  soon  as 
their riders came down into the lower glades of the wood they burst into a song of 
much the same kind as before. This is something like it: 
 

The dragon is withered, 
His bones are now crumbled; 
His armour is shivered, 
His splendour is humbled! 
Though sword shall be rusted, 
And throne and crown perish  
With strength that men trusted 
And wealth that they cherish, 
Here grass is still growing, 
And leaves are yet swinging, 
The white water flowing, 
And elves are yet singing 
Come! Tra-la-la-lally! 
Come back to the valley! 
 
The stars are far brighter 
Than gems without measure, 
The moon is far whiter 
Than silver in treasure: 
The fire is more shining 
On hearth in the gloaming 
Than gold won by mining, 
So why go a -roaming? 
O! Tra-la-la-lally 
Come back to the Valley.  
 
O! Where are you going, 

####-So late in returning? 
The river is flowing, 
The stars are all burning! 
O! Whither so laden, 
So sad and so dreary? 
Here elf and elf-maiden 
Now welcome the weary 
With Tra-la-la-lally 
Come back to the Va lley,  
Tra-la-la-lally 
Fa-la-la-lally 
Fa-la! 

 
Then  the  elves  of  the  valley  came  out  and  greeted  them  and  led  them  across 
the  water  to  the  house  of  Elrond.  There  a  warm  welcome  was  made  them,  and 
there  were  many  eager  ears  that  evening  to  hear  the  tale  of  their  adventures. 
Gandalf it was who spoke, for Bilbo was fallen quiet and drowsy. Most of the tale 
he  knew,  for  he  had  been  in  it,  and  had  himself  told much  of  it  to  the  wizard  on 
their homeward way or  in  the house of Beorn; but every now and again he would 
open one eye, and listen, when a part of the story which he did not yet know came 
in. It was in this way that he learned where Gandalf had been to; for he overheard 
the  words  of  the  wizard  to  Elrond.  It  appeared  that  Gandalf  had  been  to  a  great 
council of the white wizards, masters of lore and good magic; and that they had at 
last driven the Necromancer from his dark hold in the south of Mirkwood. 
"Ere  long  now,"  Gandalf  was  saying,  "The  Forest  will  grow  somewhat  more 
wholesome. The North will be freed from that horror for many long years, I hope. 
Yet I wish he were banished from the world!" 
"It would be well  indeed," said Elrond; "but I fear  that will not come about  in 
this age of the world, or for many after." 
When  the  tale  of  their  joumeyings  was  told,  there  were  other  tales,  and  yet 
more  tales,  tales of  long ago, and  tales  . of new  things, and  tales of no  time at all, 
till Bilbo's head fell forward on his chest, and he snored comfortably in a corner.  
He woke to find himself in a white bed, and the moon shining through an open 
window.  Below  it  many  elves  were  singing  loud  and  clear  on  the  banks  of  the 
stream. 
 

Sing all ye joyful, now sing all together?  
The wind's in the free-top, the wind's in the heather;  
The stars are in blossom, the moon is in flower,  

####-And bright are the windows of Night in her tower.  
 
Dance all ye joyful, now dance all together! 
Soft is the grass, and let foot be like feather! 
The river is silver, the shadows are fleeting; 
Merry is May-time, and merry our meeting. 
 
Sing we now softly, and dreams let us weave him! 
Wind him in slumber and there let us leave him! 
The wanderer sleepeth. Now soft be his pillow! 
Lullaby! Lullaby! Alder and Willow! 
 
Sigh no more Pine, till the wind of the morn! 
Fall Moon! Dark be the land! 
Hush! Hush! Oak, Ash, and Thorn! 
Hushed be all water, till dawn is at hand! 

 
"Well, Merry People!" said Bilbo looking out. "What time by the moon is this? 
Your lullaby would waken a drunken goblin! Yet I thank you." 
"And  your  snores  would  waken  a  stone  dragon  –  yet  we  thank  you,"  they 
answered  with  laughter.  "It  is  drawing    towards  dawn,  and  you  have  slept  now 
since the night's beginning. Tomorrow, perhaps, you will be cured of weariness." 
"A  little  sleep  does  a  great  cure  in  the  house  of  Elrond,"  said  he;  "but  I  will 
take  all  the  cure  I  can  get.  A  second  good  night,  fair  friends!"  And  with  that  he 
went back to bed and slept till late morning. 
Weariness fell from him soon in that house, and he had many a merry jest and 
dance,  early  and  late,  with  the  elves  of  the  valley.  Yet  even  that  place  could  not 
long  delay  him  now,  and  he  thought  always  of  his  own  home.  After  a  week, 
therefore, he said farewell  to Elrond, and giving him such small gifts as he would 
accept, he  rode  away with Gandalf. Even  as  they  left  the valley  the  sky darkened 
in the West before them, and wind and rain came up to meet them. 
"Merry  is May-time!" said Bilbo, as  the  rain beat  into his  face. "But our back 
is to legends and we are coming home. I suppose this is a first taste of it." 
"There is a long road yet," said Gandalf. 
"But  it  is  the  last  road,"  said  Bilbo.  They  came  to  the  river  that  marked  the 
very  edge  of  the  borderland  of  the Wild,  and  to  the  ford  beneath  the  steep  bank, 
which  you  may  remember.  The  water  was  swollen  both  with  the  melting  of  the 
snows  at  the  approach  of  summer,  and  with  the  daylong  rain;  but  they  crossed 
with some difficulty, and pressed forward, as evening fell, on the last stage of their 

####-journey.  This  was  much  as  it  had  been  before,  except  that  the  company  was 
smaller,  and  more  silent;  also  this  time  there were  no  trolls. At  each  point  on  the 
road Bilbo  recalled  the  happenings  and  the words  of  a  year  ago-it seemed  to him 
more  like  ten-so  that,  of  course,  he  quickly  noted  the  place  where  the  pony  had 
fallen  in  the  river,  and  they  had  turned  aside  for  their  nasty  adventure with  Tom 
and  Bert  and  Bill. Not  far  from  the  road  they  found  the  gold  of  the  trolls, which 
they had buried,  still hidden  and untouched.  "I have  enough  to  last me my  time," 
said Bilbo, when they had dug it up. "You had better take this, Gandalf. I daresay 
you can find a use for it." 
"Indeed I can!" said the wizard. "But share and share alike! You may find you 
have more needs than you expect." 
So they put the gold in bags and slung them on the ponies, who were not at all 
pleased  about  it.  After  that  their  going  was  slower,  for  most  of  the  time  they 
walked.  But  the  land  was  green  and  there  was  much  grass  through  which  the 
hobbit  strolled  along  contentedly.  He  mopped  his  face  with  a  red  silk 
handkerchief-no!  not  a  single  one  of  his own had  survived, he had borrowed  this 
one from Elrond  –for now June had brought summer, and  the weather was bright 
and hot again. 
As  all  things  come  to  an  end,  even  this  story,  a  day  came  at  last  when  they 
were in sight of the country where Bilbo had been born and bred, where the shapes 
of  the  land  and  of  the  trees  were  as  well  known  to  him  as  his  hands  and  toes. 
Coming  to  a  rise  he  could  see  his  own  Hill  in  the  distance,  and  he  stopped 
suddenly and said: 
 

Roads go ever ever on, 
Over rock and under tree, 
By caves where never sun has shone, 
By streams that never find the sea; 
 
Over snow by winter sown, 
And through the merry flowers of June, 
Over grass and over stone, 
And under mountains in the moon. 
 
Roads go ever ever on 
Under cloud and under star,  
Yet feet that wandering have gone 
Turn at last to home afar.  
 

####-Eyes that fire and sword have seen 
And horror in the halls of stone 
Look at last on meadows green 
And trees and hills they long have known. 

 
Gandalf  looked  at  him.  "My  dear  Bilbo!"  he  said.  "Something  is  the  matter 
with you! You are not the hobbit that you were." 
And so they crossed the bridge and passed the mill by the river and came right 
back  to  Bilbo's  own  door.  "Bless  me!  What's  going  on?"  he  cried.  There  was  a 
great  commotion,  and  people  of  all  sorts,  respectable  and  unrespectable,  were 
thick  round  the  door,  and many were  going  in  and  out-not even wiping  their  feet 
on the mat, as Bilbo noticed with annoyance. 
If he was surprised,  they were more surprised still. He had arrived back  in  the 
middle  of an auction! There was a large notice in black and red hung on the gate, 
stating  that  on  June  the  Twenty-second  Messrs.  Grubb,  Grubb,  and  Bun-owes 
would  sell  by  auction  the  effects  of  the  late  Bilbo  Baggins  Esquire,  of  Bag-End, 
Underhill,  Hobbiton.  Sale  to  commence  at  ten  o'clock  sharp.  It  was  now  nearly 
lunch-time,  and most  of  the  things  had  already  been  sold,  for  various  prices  from 
next  to  nothing  to  old  songs  (as  is  not  unusual  at  auctions).  Bilbo's  cousins  the 
Sackville-Bagginses  were,  in  fact,  busy  measuring  his  rooms  to  see  if  their  own 
furniture would  fit.  In  short Bilbo was  "Presumed Dead,"  and not  everybody  that 
said so was sorry to find the presumption wrong. 
The  return  of  Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins  created  quite  a  disturbance,  both  under  the 
Hill  and  over  the Hill, and across  the Water;  it was a great deal more  than a nine 
days' wonder.  The  legal  bother,  indeed,  lasted  for  years.  It was  quite  a  long  time 
before Mr. Baggins was in fact admitted to be alive again. The people who had got 
specially  good  bargains  at  the  Sale  took  a  deal  of  convincing;  and  in  the  end  to 
sav6  time  Bilbo  had  to  buy  back  quite  a  lot  of  his  own  furniture.  Many  of  his 
silver  spoons mysteriously  disappeared  and were  never  accounted  for.  Personally 
he  suspected  the  Sackville-Bagginses.  On  their  side  they  never  admitted  that  the 
returned  Baggins  was  genuine,  and  they  were  not  on  friendly  terms  with  Bilbo 
ever after. They really had wanted to live in his nice hobbit-hole so very much. 
Indeed Bilbo  found he had  lost more  than  spoons  – he had lost his reputation. 
It  is  true  that  for  ever  after  he  remained  an  elf-friend,  and  had  the  honour  of 
dwarves, wizards, and all such folk as ever passed that way; but he was no longer 
quite  respectable.  He  was  in  fact  held  by  all  the  hobbits  of  the  neighbourhood to 
be  'queer'-except by his nephews and nieces on  the Took  side, but even  they were 
not  encouraged  in  their  friendship  by  their  elders.  I  am  sorry  to  say  he  did  not 

####-mind.  He  was  quite  content;  and  the  sound  of  the  kettle  on  his  hearth  was  ever 
after more musical  than  it had been  even  in  the quiet days before  the Unexpected 
Party. His sword he hung over  the mantelpiece. His coat of mail was arranged on 
a  stand  in  the hall  (until he  lent  it  to  a Museum). His gold  and  silver was  largely 
spent in presents, both useful and extravagant – which to a certain extent accounts 
for  the  affection  of  his  nephews  and  his  nieces.  His  magic  ring  he  kept  a  great 
secret,  for  he  chiefly  used  it  when  unpleasant  callers  came.  He  took  to  writing 
poetry  and  visiting  the  elves;  and  though  many  shook  their  heads  and  touched 
their  foreheads  and  said  "Poor  old Baggins!"  and  though  few  believed  any  of  his 
tales,  he  remained  very  happy  to  the  end  of  his  days,  and  those  were 
extraordinarily long. 
One  autumn  evening  some  years  afterwards  Bilbo  was  sitting  in  his  study 
writing  his  memoirs  –  he  thought  of  calling  them  "There  and  Back  Again,  a 
Hobbit's  Holiday"  –  when  there  was  a  ring  at  the  door.  It  was  Gandalf  and  a 
dwarf; and the dwarf was actually Balin. 
"Come  in!  Come  in!"  said  Bilbo,  and  soon  they  were  settled  in  chairs  by  the 
fire. If Balin noticed that Mr. Baggins' waistcoat was more extensive (and had real 
gold buttons), Bilbo also noticed that Balm's beard was several inches longer, and 
his jewelled belt was of great magnificence. 
They  fell  to  talking  of  their  times  together,  of  course,  and  Bilbo  asked  how 
things  were  going  in  the  lands  of  the Mountain.  It  seemed  they  were  going  very 
well.  Bard  had  rebuilt  the  town  in  Dale  and  men  had  gathered  to  him  from  the 
Lake  and  from  South  and  West,  and  all  the  valley  had  become  tilled  again  and 
rich, and the desolation was now filled with birds and blossoms in spring and fruit 
and  feasting  in  autumn. And Lake-town was refounded and was more prosperous 
than  ever,  and much wealth went  up  and down the Running River; and there was 
friendship in those parts between elves and dwarves and men. 
The old Master had come to a bad end. Bard had given him much gold for the 
help  of  the  Lake-people,  but  being  of  the  kind  that  easily  catches  such  disease  he 
fell under the dragon-sickness, and took most of the gold and fled with it, and died 
of starvation in the Waste, deserted by his companions. 
"The  new  Master  is  of  wiser  kind,"  said  Balin,  "and  very  popular,  for,  of 
course,  he  gets  most  of  the  credit  for  the  present  prosperity.  They  are  making 
songs which say that in his day the rivers run with gold." 
"Then  the  prophecies  of  the  old  songs  have  turned  out  to  be  true,  after  a 
fashion!" said Bilbo. 

####-"Of  course!"  said Gandalf.  "And why  should  not  they  prove  true? Surely you 
don't  disbelieve  the  prophecies,  because  you  had  a  hand  in  bringing  them  about 
yourself? You  don't  really  suppose,  do  you,  that  all  your  adventures  and  escapes 
were  managed  by  mere  luck,  just  for  your  sole  benefit?  You  are  a  very  fine 
person,  Mr.  Baggins,  and  I  am  very  fond  of  you;  but  you  are  only  quite  a  little 
fellow in a wide world after all!" 
"Thank goodness!" said Bilbo laughing, and handed him the tobacco-jar.  
 

####-####- 
 

Complete Table of Contents 
 

 Foreword  
     
 Prologue   
Concerning Hobbits  
     1.  
Concerning Pipe-weed  
     2.  
Of the Ordering of the Shire  
     3.  
Of the Finding of the Ring  
     4.  
      
note on the shire records  
      

####-Book I  
     Chapter 1   A Long-expected Party  
     Chapter 2   The Shadow of the Past  
     Chapter 3   Three is Company   
     Chapter 4   A Short Cut to Mushrooms  
     Chapter 5   A Conspiracy Unmasked   
     Chapter 6   The Old Forest  
     Chapter 7   In the House of Tom Bombadil   
     Chapter 8  Fog on the Barrow-Downs  
     Chapter 9   At the Sign of The Prancing Pony  
     Chapter 10  Strider  
     Chapter 11  A Knife in the Dark   
     Chapter 12  Flight to the Ford   
      
Book II  
     Chapter 1   Many Meetings  
     Chapter 2   The Council of Elrond   
     Chapter 3   The Ring Goes South   
     Chapter 4   A Journey in the Dark   
     Chapter 5   The Bridge of Khazad-dym  
     Chapter 6   Lothlurien  
     Chapter 7   The Mirror of Galadriel   
     Chapter 8   Farewell to Lurien   
     Chapter 9   The Great River  
     Chapter 10  The Breaking of the Fellowship  
      

####-Book III  
     Chapter 1   The Departure of Boromir  
     Chapter 2   The Riders of Rohan   
     Chapter 3   The Uruk-Hai  
     Chapter 4   Treebeard  
     Chapter 5   The White Rider  
     Chapter 6   The King of the Golden Hall   
     Chapter 7   Helm's Deep  
     Chapter 8   The Road to Isengard   
     Chapter 9   Flotsam and Jetsam   
     Chapter 10  The Voice of Saruman   
     Chapter 11  The Palantnr  
      
Book IV   
     Chapter 1   The Taming of Smjagol   
     Chapter 2   The Passage of the Marshes  
     Chapter 3   The Black Gate is Closed   
     Chapter 4   Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit  
     Chapter 5   The Window on the West  
     Chapter 6   The Forbidden Pool   
     Chapter 7   Journey to the Cross-roads  
     Chapter 8   The Stairs of Cirith Ungol   
     Chapter 9   Shelob's Lair  
     Chapter 10  The Choices of Master Samwise   
      

####-Book V   
     Chapter 1   Minas Tirith  
     Chapter 2   The Passing of the Grey Company   
     Chapter 3   The Muster of Rohan  
     Chapter 4   The Siege of Gondor  
     Chapter 5   The Ride of the Rohirrim   
     Chapter 6   The Battle of the Pelennor Fields  
     Chapter 7   The Pyre of Denethor  
     Chapter 8   The Houses of Healing   
     Chapter 9   The Last Debate   
     Chapter 10  The Black Gate Opens  
      
Book VI   
     Chapter 1   The Tower of Cirith Ungo 
     Chapter 2   The Land of Shadow   
     Chapter 3   Mount Doom   
     Chapter 4   The Field of Cormallen   
     Chapter 5   The Steward and the King   
     Chapter 6   Many Partings  
     Chapter 7   Homeward Bound  
     Chapter 8   The Scouring of the Shire   
     Chapter 9   The Grey Havens  

####-Foreword 

 
 
     This  tale grew in the telling, until it became  a history of the Great 
War of the  Ring and included  many glimpses of the yet more ancient history 
that preceded it. It was begun soon after The  Hobbit was written and before 
its publication in 1937; but I did not go  on with this sequel, for I wished 
first  to complete and set in  order the mythology and  legends of the Elder  
Days, which had then been taking shape for some years. I desired to do  this 
for my own satisfaction,  and  I had little hope that other people would  be 
interested  in  this work, especially  since it was primarily  linguistic in 
inspiration and  was begun  in order to provide  the necessary background of 
'history' for Elvish tongues. 
     When  those  whose advice and opinion I sought corrected little hope to 
no hope, I went back to the sequel, encouraged by  requests from readers for  
more information concerning hobbits and their adventures. But the story  was 
drawn  irresistibly  towards the  older world, and became an account,  as it 
were, of its end and passing away  before its beginning and middle had  been 
told. The process  had begun  in the writing  of The Hobbit, in which  there 
were  already  some  references to the older  matter:  Elrond, Gondolin, the 
High-elves, and the  orcs,  as  well as glimpses that had arisen unbidden of 
things higher or deeper  or darker than its surface: Durin,  Moria, Gandalf, 
the Necromancer,  the  Ring.  The  discovery  of the significance  of  these 
glimpses and of  their relation to  the ancient histories revealed the Third 
Age and its culmination in the War of the Ring. 
     Those who  had asked for  more information about hobbits eventually got  
it, but they had to wait a long time; for the composition of The Lord of the 
Rings went on at intervals during the  years 1936 to 1949, a period in which  
I had  many  duties that  I did not neglect, and  many  other interests as a  
learner and teacher  that often absorbed  me. The delay was, of course, also 
increased by the outbreak of war in 1939, by the end of which  year the tale 
had not yet reached  the  end  of Book  One. In spite of the darkness of the 
next  five years I  found that the story could  not now be  wholly abandoned,  
and  I plodded on, mostly  by night, till I stood  by Balin's tomb in Moria. 
There I halted for a long while. It  was almost a  year later when I went on 
and so came to Lothlurien and the Great River late in 1941. In the next year  

####-I  wrote the first drafts of the  matter  that now stands as Book Three, and 
the beginnings of  chapters I and III of Book Five; and there as the beacons 
flared in  Anurien  and Thjoden came to Harrowdale I stopped.  Foresight had 
failed and there was no time for thought. 
     It was  during 1944  that, leaving the loose ends and perplexities of a  
war which it was my task to  conduct, or at least to report, 1 forced myself 
to tackle the journey of Frodo  to  Mordor.  These chapters,  eventually  to 
become  Book Four,  were  written  and  sent  out  as  a  serial  to my son, 
Christopher, then in South Africa with the RAF.  Nonetheless it took another 
five  years before the tale was brought to its present end;  in that  time I 
changed my house, my chair,  and my college,  and the days though  less dark 
were no less laborious.  Then when the 'end' had  at last  been reached  the 
whole story had to be revised, and indeed  largely re-written backwards. And 
it had to be typed, and  re-typed: by me; the cost of professional typing by 
the ten-fingered was beyond my means. 
     The Lord of the  Rings has been read by many  people since  it  finally 
appeared in print; and I should like to say something here with reference to 
the many opinions  or guesses that I  have  received or have read concerning 
the motives  and meaning  of  the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a  
tale-teller  to try  his hand at a  really long  story that would  hold  the 
attention  of  readers, amuse them, delight  them, and at times maybe excite 
them or deeply move them. As a guide I had only my own  feelings for what is 
appealing or moving, and for  many the guide  was inevitably often at fault. 
Some who have read the book, or at  any rate have reviewed it, have found it 
boring, absurd, or contemptible; and I have no  cause  to complain, since  I 
have similar opinions of  their works, or of the kinds  of writing that they 
evidently  prefer. But even from the points of view of many who have enjoyed 
my story there is much that fails to please. It is perhaps not possible in a  
long tale to please everybody at  all  points, nor to displease everybody at 
the same points; for I find from the letters that I have  received  that the 
passages or chapters that are to some a blemish  are all by others specially 
approved. The  most critical  reader of all, myself, now finds many defects,  
minor and major, but  being fortunately under no obligation either to review 
the book  or  to write  it again, he will pass over these in  silence, except 
one that has been noted by others: the book is too short. 
     As for any inner meaning or  'message', it has in the intention  of the 
author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. As the story grew it put 

####-down roots  (into the past) and threw out unexpected branches: but  its main 
theme was  settled from  the outset by the  inevitable choice of the Ring as 
the link between it and  The Hobbit. The crucial chapter, "The Shadow of the 
Past', is  one of the oldest parts of the tale.  It  was written long before 
the foreshadow  of  1939 had yet become a threat of inevitable disaster, and 
from that  point the  story would have developed along essentially  the same 
lines, if that disaster had been averted. Its sources are things long before 
in mind, or in some  cases already written, and  little or nothing in it was 
modified by the war that began in 1939 or its sequels.  
     The real war  does not resemble the legendary war in its process or its 
conclusion. If it had inspired  or  directed  the development of the legend, 
then certainly the  Ring would have  been seized and used against Sauron; he 
would  not have been annihilated  but enslaved, and Barad-dyr would not have 
been destroyed but occupied. Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring, 
would m the confusion  and treacheries of the  time have found in Mordor the 
missing links in his own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would 
have made a Great  Ring  of his  own with which to challenge the self-styled 
Ruler of Middle-earth.  In that conflict both sides would  have held hobbits 
in hatred and contempt: they would not long have survived even as slaves. 
     Other arrangements could be devised according to the tastes or views of 
those  who  like allegory  or  topical reference.  But I  cordially  dislike 
allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so since I grew old 
and  wary  enough to  detect  its  presence. I  much prefer history, true or  
feigned, with its varied  applicability  to the  thought  and  experience of 
readers. I think that many confuse 'applicability' with 'allegory'; but  the 
one  resides  in the  freedom of the reader, and the  other in  the purposed 
domination of the author. 
     An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected  by his experience,  
but the ways in which a story-germ uses the soil of experience are extremely  
complex,  and  attempts  to  define  the  process  are at  best guesses from 
evidence  that  is  inadequate  and  ambiguous.  It  is also  false,  though 
naturally  attractive,  when  the  lives  of   an  author  and  critic  have 
overlapped, to  suppose that the movements of thought or the events of times 
common to both were necessarily the most powerful influences. One has 
indeed 
personally to come under the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression; but 
as the years go by it seems now often forgotten that to  be caught  in youth 

####-by  1914 was no less hideous an experience  than to  be involved in 1939 and 
the  following years. By 1918 all but one of my close  friends were dead. Or  
to  take  a less grievous  matter:  it  has been supposed by some  that 'The 
Scouring of  the Shire' reflects the situation in England at the time when I 
was finishing  my tale. It does  not. It is an  essential  part of the plot, 
foreseen from the outset, though in the event  modified  by the character of 
Saruman as  developed  in  the story  without, need I  say,  any allegorical 
significance or contemporary political reference  whatsoever. It has  indeed 
some basis in experience,  though  slender (for the  economic situation  was 
entirely different),  and much further back. The country in which I lived in 
childhood was  being  shabbily  destroyed before  I was  ten, in  days  when 
motor -cars were  rare objects  (I had  never seen  one) and  men wer e  still 
building suburban railways.  Recently I saw in a paper a picture of the last  
decrepitude of  the once  thriving  corn-mill beside its  pool that long ago 
seemed to me so important.  I never liked the looks of the Young miller, but 
his father,  the Old  miller,  had  a  black  beard,  and he  was  not named 
Sandyman. 
     The  Lord  of  the  Rings is  now  issued in  a  new  edition,  and the 
opportunity  has  been  taken  of  revising  it.  A  number  of  errors  and 
inconsistencies that still rema ined in  the text have been corrected, and an 
attempt has been made to provide information on a few points which attentive 
readers have raised. I have considered all their comments and enquiries, and 
if some seem to have been passed over  that  may be because I have failed to  
keep  my  notes in  order;  but many  enquiries  could only  be answered  by  
additional appendices, or indeed  by the  production  of an accessory volume  
containing  much of  the material that I did not  include  in  the  original 
edition, in particular more detailed linguistic information. In the meantime 
this edition offers this Foreword, an  addition to the Prologue, some notes,  
and an index of the names of persons and places. This index is in  intention 
complete in items  but not in references,  since for the present  purpose it 
has been  necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index, making full use of 
the  material  prepared  for  me  by Mrs.  N. Smith,  belongs  rather to the 
accessory volume. 
 

####-* PROLOGUE * 

 
 

1. Concerning Hobbits 

 
 
     This  book  is largely  concerned  with  Hobbits, and from its pages  a  
reader  may discover  much of their character and a little of their history. 
Further information will also be found in the selection from the Red Book of 
Westmarch  that has already been published, under the  title of The  Hobbit. 
That story  was derived  from the earlier chapters of the Red Book, composed 
by  Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become famous in  the world at large, 
and called by him There and  Back Again, since they told of his journey into 
the East and his  return: an adventure  which later involved all the Hobbits 
in the great events of that Age that are here related. 
     Many, however, may wish to know more about  this remarkable people 
from 
the outset, whi le some  may not possess the earlier book. For such readers a  
few notes on the more important points are here  collected from Hobbit-lore,  
and the first adventure is briefly recalled. 
     Hobbits are  an  unobtrusive  but  very  ancient  people, more numerous 
formerly than they are today; for they love peace and quiet and  good tilled 
earth: a well-ordered and well-farmed countryside was their favourite haunt. 
They do not and did not understand or like machines more  complicated than a  
forge-bellows, a water -mill, or a  hand-loom, though  they were skilful with  
tools. Even in ancient days they  were, as a rule, shy of 'the Big Folk', as 
they call us, and now  they avoid us with  dismay and are  becoming hard  to  
find. They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though they are inclined  
to be  fat  and do not hurry unnecessarily, they are nonetheless  nimble and 
deft  in  their  movements.  They  possessed  from  the  first  the  art  of 
disappearing  swiftly and silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to 
meet come blundering by; and this an they have developed until to Men it may 
seem  magical. But Hobbits have never, in  fact,  studied magic of any kind,  
and their elusiveness  is due  solely to a professional skill  that heredity 
and  practice,  and  a  close  friendship  with  the  earth,  have  rendered 

####-inimitable by bigger and clumsier races.  
     For  they are  a  little people,  smaller  than Dwarves:  less tout and 
stocky, that is, even when they  are not actually much shorter. Their height 
is  variable, ranging between two and  four feet of our measure. They seldom 
now reach three feet; but they hive dwindled, they  say, and in ancient days 
they were  taller. According to the Red Book,  Bandobras Took  (Bullroarer), 
son of Isengrim the Second,  was four foot five and able to ride a  horse. He 
was  surpassed  in all Hobbit records only by two famous characters of  old;  
but that curious matter is dealt with in this book. 
     As for the Hobbits of the  Shire,  with whom these tales are concerned, 
in  the  days  of their peace and prosperity they  were  a  merry folk. They 
dressed in bright colours, being notably fond of yellow and green;  but they 
seldom wore shoes, since  their feet had tough leathery soles  and were clad 
in  a  thick  curling hair, much like  the hair  of  their  heads, which was 
commonly  brown.  Thus,  the  only  craft  little  practised among them  was 
shoe-making; but they had long and skilful fingers and could make many other 
useful and comely  things.  Their faces  were as  a rule good-natured rather  
than  beautiful,  broad,  bright-eyed,  red-cheeked,  with  mouths   apt  to 
laughter,  and to eating and  drinking. And laugh  they  did,  and  eat, and 
drink, often and heartily, being fond  of simple  jests at all times, and of 
six meals  a  day (when  they  could  get them).  They  were  hospitable and 
delighted in  parties, and  in  presents, which  they  gave away freely  and 
eagerly accepted. 
     It  is plain indeed that  in spite  of later  estrangement Hobbits  are 
relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves. Of old 
they spoke  the languages  of Men,  after their own fashion,  and liked  and 
disliked much  the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship 
is  can no longer be discovered. The  beginning of Hobbits lies  far back in 
the  Elder Days that  are  now  lost and  forgotten.  Only  the Elves  still 
preserve any  records  of  that  vanished  time, and  their  traditions  are 
concerned almost entirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom 
and Hobbits are not mentioned at  all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits  had, in 
fact, lived quietly in  Middle-earth for  many  long years before other folk  
became  even aware of  them.  And the world being after all  full of strange 
creatures   beyond  count,  these  little  people   seemed  of  very  little 
importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and  of Frodo his  heir, they suddenly 
became, by no wish of  their  own, both important and renowned, and troubled 

####-the counsels of the Wise and  the Great. 
     Those days,  the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long past, and  the 
shape  of all lands has  been changed; but the regions in which Hobbits then  
lived were doubtless  the  same  as  those  in which  they still linger: the 
North-West  of the  Old World, east of  the Sea. Of their original home  the 
Hobbits in Bilbo's time preserved no  knowledge. A  love  of learning (other  
than genealogical lore) was far from general among them,  but there remained 
still a few  in  the  older families  who  studied their own books, and even 
gathered reports  of old times and distant lands  from Elves,  Dwarves,  and 
Men. Their own  records  began only  after the settlement of the  Shire, and 
their most ancient  legends hardly looked further  back than their Wandering  
Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of 
their peculiar words  and customs, that like many other  folk Hobbits had in 
the distant past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time 
when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, between the eaves of 
Greenwood 
the Great  and the Misty Mountains. Why they  later undertook  the hard  and 
perilous crossing of the mountains into Eriador is no longer  certain. Their 
own  accounts speak  of the multiplying of Men in  the land, and of a shadow 
that fell on the forest,  so that it became  darkened  and its new  name was 
Mirkwood. 
     Before the  crossing  of the  mountains the Hobbits had  already become 
divided  into  three  somewhat   different  breeds:  Harfoots,  Stoors,  and 
Fallohides. The Harfoots were  browner  of skin, smaller,  and  shorter, and 
they were beardless and bootless; their hands and feet were neat and nimble;  
and they preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, heavier  
in build; their feet  and hands were larger,  and they preferred flat  lands 
and riversides.  The Fallohides  were fairer of  skin and also of  hair, and 
they were taller and slimmer than the others; they were lovers of  trees and 
of woodlands.  
     The  Harfoots had  much  to do  with Dwarves in ancient times, and long 
lived in the  foothills  of  the  mountains. They moved westward early,  and 
roamed over Eriador as far as Weathertop while the  others were still in the 
Wilderland. They were the most normal  and representative variety of Hobbit, 
and  far  the most  numerous. They  were the most inclined to settle  in one 
place, and longest preserved their ancestral habit of living in  tunnels and 
holes. 

####-     The Stoors lingered long by  the  banks of  the Great River Anduin, and 
were less shy of Men.  They came west after  the  Harfoots and  followed the 
course of the  Loudwater  southwards;  and  there  many of  them  long dwelt 
between Tharbad and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again. 
     The  Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They were 
more friendly with Elves  than the other Hobbits were, and had more skill in 
language  and song than in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to 
tilling.  They  crossed the mountains north of Rivendell  and came  down the  
River Hoarwell. In  Eriador they soon  mingled with the other kinds that had 
preceded them,  but being somewhat  bolder  and more adventurous, they  were 
often found as leaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even 
in Bilbo's time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among the 
greater families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland. 
     In the  westlands  of Eriador, between  the  Misty  Mountains  and  the 
Mountains of  Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves. Indeed, a  remnant 
still dwelt there of the D®nedain, the kings of Men that  came over the  Sea  
out of  Westernesse; but  they were  dwindling fast and  the  lands of their 
North Kingdom were falling far and  wide into waste. There was  room and  to 
spare for  incomers, and ere long  the Hobbits began  to  settle in  ordered 
communities. Most of their earlier settlements had long disappeared and been 
forgotten in Bilbo's time;  but  one of the  first to become important still 
endured, though reduced in  size; this  was at Bree and in the Chetwood that 
lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire. 
     It was in these  early days,  doubtless, that the Hobbits learned their 
letters and  began to write  after  the  manner  of the D®nedain, who had in 
their  turn long before learned  the art from  the Elves. And in  those days 
also they  forgot  whatever languages  they had used before,  and spoke ever  
after the  Common  Speech, the  Westron as it  was  named, that was  current 
through all the lands of the kings  from Arnor to  Gondor, and about all the 
coasts of the Sea from Belfalas to Lune. Yet they kept  a few words of their 
own,  as  well as their own names of months  and days, and  a great store of 
personal names out of the past. 
     About this time legend among  the Hobbits first  becomes history with a  
reckoning  of years. For it was in the  one thousand  six hundred  and first  
year of the  Third Age  that the  Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set 
out  from  Bree; and having  obtained  permission  from  the  high  king  at 
Fornost1,  they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a  great following of 

####-Hobbits.  They passed over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had been  built  in 
the  days  of the  power of the North Kingdom,  and they took ail  the  land 
beyond  to  dwell in,  between  the river and  the Far Downs.  All  that was 
demanded of them was  that they should keep the Great Bridge in  repair, and 
all other bridges  and roads,  speed the king's messengers, and  acknowledge 
his lordship. 
     Thus began  the Shire-reckoning, for the year  of  the  crossing of the 
Brandywine (as the  Hobbits turned the name) became  Year One  of the Shire, 
and all later dates were reckoned from it.2 At once the western Hobbits fell 
in love with their new land, and they  remained there, and soon passed  once 
more out  of the history  of Men and of Elves. While there  was still a king 
they  were in name his subjects, but they were, in  fact, ruled by their own 
chieftains  and meddled not at all with events in the world outside. To  the 
last  battle at Fornost with the Witch -lord of Angmar they  sent some bowmen 
to the aid of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men record 
it.  But in that war the North Kingdom ended; and then the  Hobbits took the 
land for their own, and they chose from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the 
authority of the king that  was  gone. There for a thousand years  they were 
little troubled  by wars, and  they prospered and  multiplied after the Dark 
Plague (S.R. 37) until the disaster of  the Long Winter and the famine  that 
followed it. Many thousands then  perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158-60) 
were at the time of this  tale long past and  the Hobbits  had again  become 
accustomed  to plenty. The land  was rich and kindly, and though it had long 
been deserted  when they entered it,  it  had  before been  well tilled, and 
there the king had once had many farms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods.  
     Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the Brandywine Bridge, 
and fifty from the northern moors to  the marshes in the south. The  Hobbits 
named  it  the Shire, as the region of the  authority of their Thain,  and a  
district of well-ordered  business; and there  in that pleasant  comer of the 
world they plied their well-ordered business of living, and they heeded less 
and less the world outside where dark things moved, until they came to think 
that  peace and  plenty were the rule in Middle-earth and the  right of  all 
sensible folk. They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of the 
Guardians, and of  the labours of those that made possible the long peace of 
the  Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but they had ceased  to  remember  
it. 
     At no  time had Hobbits of any  kind been  warlike, and  they had never  

####-fought  among  themselves. In olden days  they had, of  course,  been  often 
obliged to fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo's time 
that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and 
indeed the  only  one  that had ever been  fought  within the borders of the 
Shire, was beyond  living memory: the Battle  of  Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in  
which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had 
grown 
milder, and the  wolves  that had once  come ravening  out of the  North  in 
bitter white winters were  now only  a grandfather's tale. So,  though there 
was still  some store of  weapons in the  Shire, these were  used  mostly as 
trophies, hanging above hearths or on  walls, or gathered into the museum at 
Michel Delving. The  Mathom-house it was  called; for  anything that Hobbits 
had  no immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away,  they  called a  
mathom.  Their dwellings were apt to become rather crowded with mathoms, 
and 
many of the presents that passed from hand to hand were of that son. 
     Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curiously tough. 
They were,  if it came to it, difficult to daunt or to kill; and they  were, 
perhaps,  so unwearyingly fond of  good things not least because they could, 
when put to it, do without them,  and could survive rough handling by grief,  
foe,  or weather in  a way that astonished those who did not know them  well 
and  looked  no further than their bellies and their well-fed  faces. Though 
slow to quarrel, and for sport killing nothing that lived, they were doughty 
at bay,  and  at  need could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow,  
for they were keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and arrows.  
If any Hobbit stooped for a stone,  it was well to get  quickly under cover, 
as all trespassing beasts knew very well. 
     All Hobbits had originally  lived in  holes in the  ground, or  so they 
believed,  and in such dwellings they still  felt most at  home; but  in  the 
course of time they had been obliged to adopt other forms of abode. Actually 
in  the Shire in Bilbo's  days it  was, as a rule, only the richest and  the 
poorest Hobbits  that maintained the old custom. The poorest  went on  living 
in burrows  of the  most  primitive  kind,  mere holes indeed, with only one 
window or  none;  while  the  well-to-do  still constructed  more  luxurious 
versions of the simple diggings of old.  But suitable  sites for these large 
and ramifying tunnels (or smials as they called them) were not everywhere to 
be found; and in the flats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits, as  they 

####-multiplied, began to  build above ground. Indeed, even in the hilly  regions 
and the older villages, such  as  Hobbiton or Tuckborough,  or in the  chief 
township of the Shire, Michel Delving  on  the White Downs, there  were  now 
many houses  of wood,  brick, or stone. These  were  specially  favoured  by 
millers, smiths, ropers,  and cartwrights, and others of that sort; for even 
when  they  had holes to live in. Hobbits had long been  accustomed to build 
sheds and workshops. 
     The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to have begun among 
the inhabitants of the Marish  down by the Brandywine.  The  Hobbits of that 
quarter, the Eastfarthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they wore 
dwarf-boots in muddy  weather. But they were well known  to  be Stoors in  a 
large part of their blood, as indeed was shown by the down that many grew on 
their chins. No Har foot  or Fallohide had  any trace of a beard. Indeed, the 
folk  of  the Marish,  and  of Buckland,  east  of  the  River,  which  they 
afterwards  occupied, came for the most  part  later into the Shire  up from 
south-away;  and  they still had many peculiar names and strange  words  not 
found elsewhere in the Shire. 
     It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts beside, 
was derived from the D®nedain. But  the Hobbits  may  have learned it direct 
from the Elves, the teachers of  Men  in their  youth. For the Elves of  the 
High Kindred had not yet forsaken Middle-earth, and they dwelt still at that 
time at  the Grey Havens away to the west, and in other  places within reach 
of the  Shire. Three  Elf-towers of immemorial age were still to be seen  on 
the  Tower Hills  beyond the  western marches.  They shone far  off  in  the 
moonlight. The tallest was furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound. 
The Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea from the lop  
of that tower; but  no  Hobbit had ever  been known to climb it. Indeed, few 
Hobbits  had ever  seen or  sailed  upon the Sea, and fewer  still had  ever  
returned to  report  it. Most Hobbits regarded even  rivers  and small boats 
with deep misgivings, and not  many of  them could swim.  And as the days of 
the Shire lengthened  they  spoke  less and  less with  the  Elves, and grew 
afraid  of them, and distrustful of those  that  had dealings with them; and 
the Sea  became  a word  of fear  among them, and a token of death, and they 
turned their faces away from the hills in the west. 
     The craft  of building may have come from Elves or Men, but the Hobbits 
used it in  their own fashion. They did not go in  for  towers. Their houses 
were usually long, low,  and comfortable. The oldest kind  were,  indeed, no 

####-more than built imitations of smials, thatched with dry  grass or  straw, or  
roofed with turves,  and having walls somewhat  bulged. That stage, however, 
belonged to the early days of the Shire, and hobbit-building had long  since 
been  altered, improved by devices,  learned from Dwarves,  or discovered by 
themselves.  A  preference for round windows, and even round  doors, was the 
chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit -architecture. 
     The houses  and  the  holes   of  Shire-hobbits  were  often  large, and 
inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as bachelors very 
exceptional,  as they were also in many other ways, such as their friendship 
with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case  of the Tooks of Great Smials, or  
the Brandybucks  of  Brandy Hall,  many  generations of  relatives  lived in 
(comparative) peace  together  in one ancestral  and many -tunnelled mansion. 
All Hobbits were, in any case,  clannish and reckoned up their relationships 
with great care. They drew long and elaborate family -trees with  innumerable 
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember who is related 
to whom,  and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out 
a  family-tree  that included  even the more  important members of the  more 
important families at  the  time which these tales tell of. The genealogical 
trees  at  the  end  of  the  Red Book of  Westmarch  are  a  small book  in 
themselves,  and all but Hobbits  would find them  exceedingly dull. Hobbits 
delighted in such things, if they  were accurate: they liked  to  have books 
filled with  things that they already knew, set out fair and  square with no 
contradictions.  

####- 

2. Concerning Pipe-weed 

 
 
     There is another astonishing  thing about Hobbits of old  that must  be 
mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed  or inhaled, through pipes  of 
clay or wood, the smoke of the burning leaves of  a herb, which they  called  
pipe-weed or leaf, a variety  probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery 
surrounds the  origin  of this peculiar  custom,  or  'art' as  the  Hobbits 
preferred to call it. All that could be discovered about it in antiquity was 
put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck (later Master of Buckland), and since he 
and  the   tobacco  of the Southfarthing  play  a part in  the  history  that 
follows, his remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may be 
quoted. 
     'This,'  he says, 'is the one art that we can certainly claim to be our 
own invention.  When  Hobbi ts  first began  to smoke  is not known,  all the  
legends and family histories take it for granted; for ages folk in the Shire 
smoked various herbs, some fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that 
Tobold Hornblower  of  Longbottom  in the Southfarthing first grew  the true 
pipe-weed in his gardens in  the days of Isengrim the Second, about the year  
1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best home-grown still comes from that district, 
especially the  varieties  now  known  as Longbottom  Leaf,  Old  Toby,  and 
Southern Star. 
     'How Old  Toby came by  the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day 
he would not tell.  He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is 
said that in his youth he went often to Bree, though he certainly never went 
further fr om the Shire than that.  It is thus quite possible that he learned 
of this plant in Bree, where now, at  any rate,  it grows well on  the south 
slopes of the hill. The  Bree-hobbits  claim to have been the  first  actual 
smokers of the pipe-weed.  They cla im,  of  course, to have done  everything  
before the people of the Shire,  whom they refer  to as "colonists"; but  in 
this case their claim is, I think,  likely to be true. And  certainly it was 
from Bree  that the  art  of smoking  the genuine weed sprea d  in the recent 
centuries among Dwarves and such other folk, Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers,  
as still passed  to and fro through that  ancient road-meeting. The home and 
centre of  the an is thus to be found in  the old inn of  Bree, The Prancing 

####-Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from time beyond record. 
     'All the same,  observations  that I have made on my own many  journeys 
south have convinced me that the weed itself  is not  native to our parts of 
the  world,  but  came  northward  from the lower Anduin, whither  it was, I 
suspect, originally brought  over  Sea by the Men  of  Westernesse. It grows 
abundantly  in  Gondor, and  there  is richer and  larger than in the North, 
where it is never found wild, and flourishes  only in  warm sheltered places 
like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only 
for the fragrance of its  flowers. From  that land it must have been carried 
up the Greenway  during the long centuries between the coming of Elendil and 
our own day.  But even the D®nedain of  Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits 
first put it into pipes.  Not even the Wizards first thought of that  before 
we did.  Though one Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago,  and became 
as skilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.' 

####- 

3. Of the Ordering of the Shire 

 
 
     The  Shire was  divided  into  four  quarters,  the  Farthings  already 
referred to.  North,  South, East,  and  West;  and  these again each into a  
number of folklands,  which still bore the names of some of  the old leading  
families, although by the time  of this  history these names were no  longer 
found only in their  proper folklands.  Nearly all Tooks  still lived in the 
Tookland,  but that  was not  true  of  many  other  families,  such  as the 
Bagginses  or  the Boffins.  Outside the  Farthings  were the  East and West 
Marches:  the  Buckland  (see  beginning of Chapter  V,  Book  I);  and  the 
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1462. 
     The Shire at  this time had hardly any 'government'. Families  for  the 
most part  managed their  own affairs. Growing  food and eating  it occupied  
most of their time. In  other matters they were, as a rule, generous and not 
greedy, but  contented and moderate, so  that estates, farms, workshops, and 
small trades tended to remain unchanged for generations.  
     There  remained,  of course, the  ancient tradition concerning the high 
king at  Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, away north of the Shire. But 
there had been no king for nearly  a thousand years,  and even the ruins  of 
Kings' Norbury  were covered with grass. Yet the Hobbits  still said of wild 
folk and wicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the king. 
For they attributed to the king of old all their essential laws; and usually 
they kept the laws of free will, because they were The Rules (as they said), 
both ancient and just. 
     It is true  that  the Took  family had long  been  pre-eminent; for the 
office  of  Thain had  passed  to them  (from the Oldbucks)  some  centuries 
before,  and the chief  Took had borne that title ever since. The  Thain was 
the  master  of  the  Shire-moot, and captain of  the Shire-muster  and  the 
Hobbitry-in-arms,  but  as  muster  and moot  were only  held  in  times  of 
emergency,  which no  longer occurred, the Thainship  had  ceased to be more 
than  a  nominal dignity. The  Took  family was  still,  indeed,  accorded a  
special respect, for it remained  both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and 
was  liable  to produce in ever y generation strong  characters  of  peculiar 
habits and even adventurous temperament. The latter qualities, however, were 

####-now  rather  tolerated (in  the  rich) than  generally  approved. The custom 
endured, nonetheless, of referring to the head of the  family  as The  Took, 
and of  adding  to  his  name, if  required, a number: such  as Isengrim the 
Second, for instance. 
     The only  real official  in the Shire  at  this date  was the Mayor  of 
Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was  elected every  seven years at the 
Free Fair on the White  Downs at  the Lithe, that is at Midsummer.  As mayor  
almost   his  only  duty   was  to  preside   at  banquets,  given   on  the 
Shire-holidays,  which occurred at  frequent intervals. But  the  offices of 
Postmaster and First Shirriff were attached  to  the  mayoralty, so that  he 
managed  both the  Messenger Service  and  the  Watch.  These were the  only 
Shire-services,  and the Messengers  were the  most  numerous,  and much the 
busier of the two. By no means a ll Hobbits were lettered, but those who were 
wrote constantly to all their friends (and a  selection  of their relations)  
who lived further off than an afternoon's walk. 
     The Shirriffs was the name  that the  Hobbits gave to  their police, or  
the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They had, of course, no uniforms 
(such things being  quite unknown), only  a feather in their caps;  and they 
were  in  practice rather haywards than policemen,  more concerned  with the 
strayings of  beasts than of people. There were in all the Shire only twelve 
of them, three in  each  Farthing,  for  Inside Work. A  rather larger body, 
varying  at need,  was  employed  to  'beat  the  bounds', and to  see  that 
Outsiders of any kind, great or small, did not make themselves a nuisance. 
     At the time  when this story begins the Bounders, as they were  called, 
had been greatly  increased.  There  were  many reports  and  complaints  of 
strange persons  and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the 
first  sign  that all  was not  quite as  it  should be, and always had been 
except  in tales and legends of  long ago. Few heeded the sign, and not even  
Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty years  had passed since 
he set out on his  memorable journey, and he was old  even for Hobbits,  who 
reached a hundred  as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the 
considerable  wealth that he  had brought back. How  much or  how  little he 
revealed to no one,  not even to Frodo  his favourite 'nephew'. And he still 
kept secret the ring that he bad found. 

####- 

4. Of the Finding of the Ring  

 
 
     As is  told in The Hobbit, there came one day to Bilbo's door the great 
Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed, 
than Thorin Oakenshield,  descendant  of kings, and his twelve companions in 
exile. With  them he set  out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning 
of  April, it being then  the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great 
treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain,  beneath  Erebor 
in Dale, far off in the East. The quest was  successful, and the Dragon that 
guarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before  all  was won the Battle 
of Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and  many deeds  of  renown 
were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned 
more than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an  'accident' 
by the way.  The  party was assailed by  Orcs in a  high pass  of  the Misty 
Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was 
lost for a while in the black orc-mines deep under the mountains, and there, 
as he groped  in vain in the dark, he put  his hand on  a ring, lying on the 
floor of a tunnel. He put it in h is pocket. It seemed then like mere luck. 
     Trying to find  his way out. Bilbo went on  down to  the  roots  of the 
mountains, until he could go no further.  At the bottom  of the tunnel lay a  
cold lake far  from the light, and on an island  of rock  in the water lived 
Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his 
large  flat feet,  peering with pale luminous eyes  and  catching blind fish 
with his long fingers, and eating  them raw.  He ate  any living thing, even 
orc, if  he could catch it and strangle it without a struggle. He possessed a  
secret treasure that had come to him long ages ago,  when he  still lived in 
the light: a ring  of gold  that made its  wearer invisible. It was the  one 
thing he  loved, his 'precious', and he talked to  it, even when it  was not 
with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he 
was hunting or spying on the ores of the mines. 
     Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring had been on him 
when they met;  but it was  not, and  the hobbit held  in his hand an Elvish 
knife,  which served him as a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo 
to the Riddle-game,  saying that if he  asked a riddle which Bilbo could not 

####-guess, then  he would kill him and eat him;  but if Bilbo defeated him, then 
he would do as Bilbo wished: he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.  
     Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on nor  
back. Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another many riddles.  
In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for 
he was stumped at last  for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his hand came 
upon the ring he lad picked up and forgotten:  What  haw I got in my pocket? 
This Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses. 
     The  Authorities, it is true, differ whether  this last  question was a  
mere  'question' and not  a  'riddle' according to  the strict rules  of the 
Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the answer, 
Gollum was bound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; 
for 
the  thought  came  to him that  this slimy creature might prove false, even 
though  such  promises  were held sacred, and of old all  but  the wickedest 
things feared to break them. But after ages alone in the dark Gollum's heart 
was black, and  treachery was in it.  He slipped  away, and  returned to the 
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing,  not far off in the dark  water. There, 
he  thought,  lay  his  ring.  He was hungry now,  and angry, and  once  his 
'precious' was with him he would not fear any weapon at all. 
     But the ring was  not on the island; he had  lost it, it was  gone. His 
screech  sent a shiver down Bilbo's back, though he  did not  yet understand 
what  had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. What 
has  it got  in its pocketses? he  cried. The light in his eyes  was like  a  
green flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his 'precious'.  
Just  in  time Bilbo saw his peril,  and he fled blindly up the passage away 
from the water;  and once more he was saved by his luck. For  just as he ran 
he  put  his  hand in his  pocket, and  the ring  slipped  quietly on to his 
finger. So it was that  Gollum passed him  without seeing him, and  went  to  
guard  the  way out, lest the 'thief' should escape.  Warily Bilbo  followed 
him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself about his 'precious';  
from which  talk at last even Bilbo guessed the truth,  and hope came to him 
in the darkness: he himself had  found the marvellous  ring and a chance  of 
escape from the orcs and from Gollum. 
     At length they  came to a halt before an unseen opening that led to the 
lower  gates  of  the mines,  on the eastward  side of the mountains.  There 
Gollum  crouched at bay, smelling and listening;  and Bilbo  was  tempted to 

####-slay him with his sword. But  pity stayed him, and though  he kept the ring, 
in  which  his  only hope lay, he  would not  use  it  to  help him kill the 
wretched creature at a disadvantage. In  the  end, gathering his courage, he 
leaped  over  Gollum in the dark, and fled away down the passage, pursued by 
his enemy's cries  of hate and despair: Thief,  thief! Baggins!  We hates it 
for ever! 
     Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first told 
it to his companions.  To  them his account was  that Gollum had promised to 
give  him a present, if he  won the game;  but when  Gollum went to fetch it  
from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been 
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the  very 
ring  that he  had found, and as he had won the game, it was already  his by 
right. But being in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum 
show him  the way out, as a reward instead of  a present. This account Bilbo 
set down in  his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not  
even after  the  Council of  Elrond.  Evidently  it  still  appeared in  the 
origina l Red Book, as it  did  in several of the  copies  and abstracts. But 
many copies contain the  true account (as an alternative), derived no  doubt 
from notes by Frodo  or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they 
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything  actually written by the  old 
hobbit himself. 
     Gandalf, however,  disbelieved Bilbo's first story, as soon as he heard 
it,  and he continued  to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he  got 
the true  tale  out  of  Bilbo  after much questioning,  which for  a  while 
strained  their  friendship;  but  the  wizard seemed  to  think  the  truth 
important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought  it important, 
and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the 
first:  quite contrary to his  habit. The idea of a 'present' was  not  mere 
hobbitlike  invention,  all the  same.  It was  suggested  to Bilbo,  as  he 
confessed, by Gollum's talk that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call 
the  ring  his 'birthday  present', many times.  That also  Gandalf  thought 
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth in  this point for  
many more years, as will be seen in this book. 
     Of  Bilbo's  later adventures little  more need be said here. Wi th  the 
help of the ring he escaped from the orc-guards at the gate and rejoined his 
companions. He  used the ring many times on his  quest, chiefly for the help 
of his  friends; but  he kept it secret from them as long as he could. After  

####-his return to his home he never spoke  of  it  again to anyone, save Gandalf 
and Frodo;  and no one else  in the  Shire knew of its  existence,  or so he 
believed. Only to Frodo did he show  the account of  his Journey that he was 
writing. 
     His  sword,  Sting, Bilbo hu ng  over his  fireplace,  and  his coat  of 
marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon-hoard, he lent to a  
museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a  drawer  
at Bag  End  the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; and the  
ring, secured by a fine chain, remained in his pocket. 
     He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his fifty-second 
year (S.R. 1342),  and nothing very notable occurred in the  Shire until Mr. 
Baggins    began    the   pr eparations   for   the   celebration   of    his 
hundred-and-eleventh birthday  (S.R.  1401).  At  this  point  this  History 
begins. 

####- 

NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS 

 
 
     At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits in the great 
events that led  to  the  inclusion  of  the Shire  in the  Reunited Kingdom 
awakened among them a  more widespread  interest in  their own  history; and 
many of their traditions, up to that time still  mainly oral, were collected 
and Written down. The  greater families were  also concerned with  events in 
the  Kingdom  at  large,  and  many  of  their members  studied its  ancient 
histories and  legends. By the  end of the  first century of the Fourth  Age 
there were already to be found in the Shire several libraries tha t contained 
many historical books and records. 
     The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers, at Great 
Smials,  and at Brandy Hall.  This  account of the end of  the Third  Age is 
drawn mainly from the Red Book of Westmarch. That most important  source 
for 
the  history  of  the War  of  the Ring was so  called because it  was  long 
preserved  at  Undertowers,  the  home  of the Fairbairns,  Wardens  of  the 
Westmarch.1  It was in origin Bilbo's private diary, which he took with  him 
to Rivendell.  Frodo brought  it back to the Shire, together with many loose 
leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages  with his 
account of the War.  But annexed to  it  and preserved with it, probably m a  
single red case, were  the three large  volumes, bound in  red leather, that 
Bilbo gave  to him as a parting gift. To these four  volumes there was added  
in Westmarch a fifth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various other  
matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship. 
     The original Red Book has  not been  preserved, but  many  copies  were 
made,  especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of the 
children  of  Master  Samwise.  The  most  important  copy, however,  has  a  
different history.  It  was kept at  Great  Smials,  but it  was written  in 
Condor,  probably at  the  request  of the  great-grandson  of Peregrin, and 
completed in S.R. 1592  (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended this  note: 
Findegil,  King's Writer, finished this work in IV 172. It  is an exact copy 
in  all details of the Thain's Book  m Minas Tirith.  That book was  a copy, 
made at the request of King Elessar,  of the Red Book of the Periannath, and 

####-was brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64 . 
     The Thain's Book was  thus  the first copy made of  the  Red  Book  and 
contained much that was later omitted or lost.  In Minas  Tirith it received 
much  annotation, and  many  corrections, especially  of  names,  words, and 
quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated  
version of those  parts of The  Tale of Aragorn  and Arwen which lie outside 
the  account of the War. The full tale  is  stated  to have been written  by 
Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the  
King. But the chief importance of  Findegil's copy is that it alone contains 
the whole  of Bilbo's 'Translations from the  Elvish'. These  three  volumes 
were  found to be a work of great skill and learning in  which, between 1403 
and 1418, he had used all the sources  available to  him  in Rivendell, both 
living and written. But  since they were little used by Frodo, being  almost  
entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here. 
     Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the  heads  of their great families,  
and  at the  same time kept up their  connexions with Rohan and  Gondor, the 
libraries at Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained much that did  not  appear 
in the Red Book.  In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing  with Eriador  
and the  history of Rohan. Some of these were composed or  begun by 
Meriadoc 
himself, though in the  Shire he was chiefly remembered for  his Herblore of 
the Shire, and for his Reckoning of  Years m which he discussed the relation 
of the calendars of the Shire and Bree  to those of  Rivendell,  Gondor, and 
Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old Words and Names  in the  Shire, 
having special interest  in discovering the kinship with the language of the 
Rohirrim of such 'shire-words' as mathom and old elements in place names. 
     At Great Smials the books were  of less interest to Shire-folk,  though 
more important for larger history. None of them was written by Peregrin, but 
he and  his successors  collected  many manuscripts written  by  scribes  of 
Gondor:  mainly  copies  or  summaries of  histories or legends  relating to 
Elendil  and his heirs. Only  here in the Shire were to  be  found extensive 
materials for  the history  of  N®menor and the  arising of  Sauron.  It was 
probably at Great Smials that The Tale of Years1 was put  together, with the 
assistance of material  collected by Meriadoc. Though  the dates  given  are 
often conjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve attention. It 
is   probable  that  Mer iadoc  obtained   assistance  and  information  from 
Rivendell,  which he  visited  more  than  once.  There, though  Elrond  had 

####-departed, his sons long remained, together with some of the High-elven folk. 
It  is  said  that  Celeborn  went  to  dwell  there after the departure  of 
Galadriel; but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the Grey 
Havens,  and  with  him went the last  living  memory  of the  Elder Days in  
Middle-earth. 

####-* BOOK I *  

 
 

Chapter 1. A Long-expected Party 

 
 
     When  Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag  End announced that  he would shortly be 
celebrating   his   eleventy-first  birthday   with  a   party  of   special 
magnificence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton. 
     Bilbo  was very rich  and very peculiar, and had been the wonder of the 
Shire  for  sixty   years,  ever  since  his  remarkable  disappearance  and 
unexpected return. The riches  he  had brought back from his travels had now 
become  a local legend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk  
might  say,  that  the Hill  at Bag  End was  full  of tunnels  stuffed with 
treasure. And if that was not enough for  fame, there was also his prolonged  
vigour  to marvel at. Time wore on,  but it seemed to  have little effect on 
Mr. Baggins. At ninety he was much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they 
began to  call him well-preserved,  but unchanged would have been nearer the 
mark. There were  some that shook their heads and thought  this was too much 
of  a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should  possess  (apparently)  
perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth. 
     'It  will  have  to be  paid for,'  they said. 'It  isn't natural,  and 
trouble will come of it!' 
     But so far trouble had not come;  and as Mr. Baggins was  generous with 
his money, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good 
fortune.  He  remained  on visiting  terms with  his  relatives (except,  of 
course, the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers among 
the 
hobbits of poor and unimportant families. But he had no close friends, until 
some of his younger cousins began to grow up. 
     The eldest of  these,  and Bilbo's favourite,  was young Frodo Baggins. 
When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to 
live  at Bag End;  and the  hopes  of the  Sackville-Bagginses were  finally 
dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same  birthday, September 
22nd. 
'You had better come and live here, Frodo my lad,' said  Bilbo one day; 'and 
then we  can  celebrate our birthday-parties  comfortably together.' At that 

####-time Frodo  was still in his tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible 
twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three. 
     Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses  had given very lively 
combined  birthday-parties  at  Bag  End;  but  now  it  was understood that 
something  quite  exceptional was being planned  for that autumn.  Bilbo was 
going  to  be  eleventy -one,  111,  a  rather  curious  number  and  a  very 
respectable  age  for a hobbit (the Old Took  himself had only reached 130); 
and Frodo was going to be thirty- three, 33) an important number: the date of 
his 'coming of age'.  
     Tongues began to wag in  Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of the coming 
event travelled all  over the Shire. The  history and character of Mr. Bilbo 
Baggins became once again the  chief  topic of  conversation; and the  older  
folk suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand. 
     No one  had  a  more attentive audience than old Ham  Gamgee,  commonly 
known as  the  Gaffer. He held forth  at  The Ivy Bush,  a small inn on  the 
Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden 
at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job befor e 
that. Now that he was himself  growing old  and stiff in the joints, the job 
was mainly  carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father  and son 
were on very friendly  terms with Bilbo and  Frodo. They  lived  on the Hill  
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End. 
     'A very nice  well-spoken  gentlehobbit  is  Mr.  Bilbo, as I've always 
said,' the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very polite to 
him, calling him 'Master Hamfast', and consulting  him  constantly upon  the 
growing  of vegetables  - in the matter of 'roots', especially  potatoes, the 
Gaffer was recognized as the  leading authority  by all in the neighbourhood 
(including himself). 
     'But  what about this Frodo that lives with  him?'  asked Old Noakes of 
Bywater.  'Baggins is his name, but he's more than  half a  Brandybuck, they 
say. It beats me why any Baggins  of  Hobbiton should go looking for a  wife 
away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.' 
     'And no  wonder they're queer,'  put  in  Daddy  Twofoot  (the Gaffer's 
next-door neighbour),  'if they live  on  the wrong  side of the  Brandywine 
River, and right agin  the Old Forest. That's a dark bad place, if half  the 
tales be true.' 
     'You're right,  Dad!' said  the  Gaffer. 'Not  that  the Brandybucks of 
Buck-land live in the Old Forest; but they're a queer breed, seemingly. They  

####-fool about  with boats on that big  river   - and that  isn't  natural. Small 
wonder that trouble came of  it,  I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is 
as nice a young hobbit  as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, 
and in  more than  looks.  After all his  father  was  a Baggins.  A  decent 
respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo  Baggins; there  was never much to tell  of 
him, till he was drownded.' 
     'Drownded?' said several  voices. They  had heard this and other darker  
rumours before, of course; but  hobbits have a passion  for  family history, 
and they were ready to hear  it again. 'Well, so they say,' said the Gaffer. 
'You see: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss  Primula Brandybuck.  She  was 
our 
Mr. Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest 
of the Old Took's  daughters); and Mr.  Drogo  was his second cousin. So Mr. 
Frodo is his first and second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying 
is,  if  you  follow me.  And Mr. Drogo was  staying at Brandy Hall with his 
father -in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often  did after his marriage (him 
being partial to  his vittles,  and old  Gorbadoc keeping  a mighty generous 
table); and he went out boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife 
were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. ' 
     'I've heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,' said 
Old Noakes; 'and it was Drogo's weight as sunk the boat.' 
     'And I heard she pushed him in, and  he pulled her in after him,'  said 
Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller. 
     'You shouldn't listen  to all you hear, Sandyman,' said the Gaffer, who 
did not much like the miller. 'There isn't no  call to go ta lking of pushing 
and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit  still without 
looking  further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this  Mr. Frodo  
left  an  orphan  and  stranded,  as  you  might   say,  among  those  queer  
Bucklanders,  being brought  up anyhow  in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by 
all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than  a couple  of hundred 
relations in  the place.  Mr. Bilbo  never did  a kinder  deed  than when he 
brought the lad back to live among decent folk. 
     'But I  reckon it was a nasty shock for those Sackville-Bagginses. They  
thought  they were going to get Bag End,  that time when he went off and was 
thought to be dead.  And then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes 
on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly 
he  produces  an  heir,  and  has  all  the  papers  made  out  proper.  The 

####-Sackville-Bagginses won't never  see the inside of Bag End now, or it  is to 
be hoped not.' 
     'There's a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,' said a  
stranger,  a visitor on  business from  Michel Delving in the  Westfarthing. 
'All the top of  your hill is full of tunnels packed with chests of gold and 
silver, and jools, by what I've heard. ' 
     'Then you've heard  more than I  can speak  to,' answered the Gaffer. I 
know nothing about  jools.  Mr. Bilbo is free with  his money, and there seems 
no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel -making. I  saw Mr. Bilbo when he came 
back, a matter of  sixty  years  ago,  when I was a  lad. I'd  not long come 
prentice to old  Holman (him being my dad's cousin), but he had me up at Bag 
End helping  him  to keep folks from trampling and  trapessing  all over the 
garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up 
the Hill  with  a pony and some mighty big  bags and a couple  of  chests. I 
don't  doubt  they were mostly full of treasure  he had picked up in foreign 
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they  say;  but there wasn't enough 
to fill tunnels. But  my lad Sam will know  more about that. He's in and out 
of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days he is, and he listens to all 
Mr. Bilbo's  tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters  - meaning no harm, 
mark you, and I hope no harm will come of it. 
     'Elves and Dragons' I says  to him. 'Cabbages and  potatoes are  better 
for me and  you. Don't go getting mixed up in  the business of your betters, 
or you'll land in trouble  too big for you,' I says  to him. And I might say 
it to others,' he added with a look at the stranger and the miller. 
     But the Gaffer did  not convince  his audience. The  legend  of Bilbo's 
wealth was now too  firmly fixed in the minds  of the  younger generation of  
hobbits. 
     'Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,' 
argued the miller, voicing common  opinion. 'He's often  away from home. And 
look at the outlandish  folk that visit him:  dwarves  coming at night,  and 
that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf,  and  all. You can say  what you like, 
Gaffer, but Bag End's a queer place, and its folk are queerer.' 
     'And you can say what you like, about what you know no more of than you  
do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,' retorted the Gaffer, disliking the miller even 
more  than usual. If  that's being queer, then we could do  with a bit  more 
queerness in these parts. There's  some  not  far away that wouldn't offer a  
pint of beer to a friend, if they  lived  in  a hole with golden  walls. But 

####-they do things proper at Bag End. Our  Sam says that  everyone's going to be 
invited to the party, and there's  going to be presents, mark you,  presents 
for all - this very month as is.' 
     That very month  was  September, and as fine as you could ask. A day or  
two  later a rumour (probably  started by the knowledgeable Sam)  was spread 
about  that there were going to be fireworks  - fireworks, what is more, such 
as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh  on a  century, not indeed  since 
the Old Took died. 
     Days passed  and The Day drew nearer.  An odd-looking waggon laden with 
odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill 
to  Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it. 
It was driven  by outlandish  folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long 
beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End.  At the end of the 
second week in September a cart came in  through Bywater from the  direction 
of the  Brandywine Bridge in  broad daylight. An old  man was driving it all  
alone.  He  wore a tall pointed blue hat,  a  long grey cloak,  and a silver  
scarf. He  had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows  that stuck  out beyond 
the  brim of  his  hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through 
Hobbiton and right up the hill. It ha d a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly 
guessed. At Bilbo's front door the old man began to unload: there were great 
bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red 
G and the elf-rune, . 
     That was Gandalf's mark, of course,  and the  old man  was Gandalf  the 
Wizard,  whose  fame in the Shire  was  due mainly to  his skill with fires,  
smokes, and lights.  His real business was far more difficult and dangerous, 
but  the Shire-folk knew nothing about  it. To them  he was just one  of the 
'attractions'  at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children.  'G  
for Grand!' they  shouted, and the old man smiled.  They knew him by  sight, 
though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but 
neither they nor  any  but  the  oldest of  their elders had seen one of his 
firework displays  - they now belonged to the legendary past. 
     When the old  man,  helped by  Bilbo  and  some  dwarves,  had finished  
unloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single squib or  cracker  
was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the onlookers.  
     'Run  away now!' said  Gandalf.  'You  will  get plenty  when  the time 
comes.' Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door  was  shut.  The 
young  hobbits  stared at  the door  in vain for a while, and then made off, 

####-feeling that the day of the party would never come. 
     Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window  of a  
small room looking out west on to the garden.  The late afternoon was br ight  
and   peaceful.  The  flowers  glowed   red  and  golden:  snap-dragons  and 
sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in 
at the round windows.  
     'How bright your garden looks!' said Gandalf. 
     'Yes,' said Bilbo. I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear old 
Shire; but I think I need a holiday.' 
     'You mean to go on with your plan then?' 
     'I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven't changed it.' 
     'Very  well.  It is no good saying any  more.  Stick to your plan  - your 
whole plan, mind  - and I hope it will turn out for the best, for  you,  and 
for all of us.' 
     'I hope  so.  Anyway  I mean to enjoy  myself on Thursday, and  have my 
little joke.' 
     'Who will laugh, I wonder?' said Gandalf, shaking his head. 
     'We shall see,' said Bilbo. 
     The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts. There 
might have  been  some grumbling about 'dealing locally', but that very week 
orders began to pour out of Bag End for every  kind of provision, commodity, 
or luxury  that  could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in the 
neighbourhood.  People  became enthusiastic; and they began to tick off  the 
days on  the calendar; and they watched eagerly for the  postman, hoping for  
invitations.  
     Before long  the  invitations  began  pouring  out,  and  the  Hobbiton 
post-office  was blocked, and the Bywater post -office  was snowed under, and 
voluntary assistant postmen were called for.  There was a constant stream of 
them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank you, 
I shall certainly come. 
     A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT 
ON PARTY 
BUSINESS. Even those  who had, or  pretended  to  have  Party  Business were 
seldom allowed inside. Bilbo  was  busy:  writing invitations,  ticking  off 
answers, packing up presents, and making  some  private preparations  of his 
own. From the time of Gandalf's arrival he remained hidden from view.  
     One morning the hobbits woke to find  the large field,  south of Bilbo's 

####-front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents  and pavilions. A special 
entrance  was cut into the bank leading to  the road, and wide steps  and  a  
large white gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row,  
adjoining the field, were intensely  interested  and  generally envied.  Old 
Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work in his garden. 
     The tents began to  go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so big 
that the tree that grew in the   field was right inside it, and stood proudly 
near one end, at the head of  the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its 
branches. More  promising still (to the hobbits' mind): an enormous open-air  
kitchen was erected in the  north corner of  the field. A draught  of cooks, 
from every inn and eating-house  for miles around, arrived to supplement the 
dwarves and other odd  folk  that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose 
to its height. 
     Then the weather  clouded  over.  That was on Wednesday the  eve of the  
Party.  Anxiety was  intense. Then Thursday,  September  the 22nd,  actually 
dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun 
began. 
     Bilbo  Baggins called it  a  party,  but it  was really  a  variety  of 
entertainments  rolled  into one.  Practically  everybody  living  near  was 
invited. A very few were overlooked  by accident, but  as they turned up all 
the same, that did not matter.  Many people  from other parts of  the  Shire 
were also asked; and there were even  a few from outside the  borders. Bilbo  
met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. He gave away 
presents to all and sundry - the latter were  those  who went out again by a  
back way  and came  in  again by  the gate. Hobbits give   presents  to other  
people  on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a  rule, and not 
so lavishly  as on this  occasion; but it was  not a bad system. Actually in 
Hobbiton  and Bywater every  day in the year it was somebody's  birthday, so 
that every  hobbit  in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present 
at least once a week. But they never got tired of them. 
     On this occasion the presents were unusually  good. The hobbit-children 
were so excited that for a while they almost forgot  about eating. There were 
toys the like  of which they had  never seen before, all beautiful and  some 
obviously magical.  Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before,  and 
had  come  all  the way  from  the Mountain and from Dale, and  were of real 
dwarf-make. 
     When  every guest had been  welcomed  and was finally inside the  gate,  

####-there were  songs, dances, music, games,  and,  of course,  food  and drink. 
There were  three  official  meals: lunch,  tea, and dinner (or supper). But 
lunch and  tea were marked chiefly by  the fact that at  those times all the 
guests  were sitting  down and eating together. At  other  times  there were 
merely lots  of  people  eating and drinking  -  continuously from elevenses 
until six-thirty, when the fireworks  started. 
     The fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought  by  him, but 
designed and made by  him; and the  special effects, set pieces, and flights 
of rockets were let off by him. But  there was  also a generous distribution 
of  squibs,  crackers,  backarappers,   sparklers,  torches,  dwarf-candles,  
elf-fountains, goblin-barkers  and thunder -claps. They  were all superb. The 
art of Gandalf improved with age. 
     There were  rockets like  a flight  of scintillating birds singing with 
sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves  
opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branches 
dropped glowing flowers down upon the  astonished hobbits, disappearing with 
a  sweet  scent just  before they touched  their  upturned faces. There were 
fountains  of butterflies that flew  glittering into  the trees;  there were 
pillars  of  coloured  fires that rose  and  turned into eagles, or  sailing 
ships,  or  a  phalanx of flying swans; there was a red  thunderstorm  and a  
shower  of  yellow  rain; there was a  forest  of silver spears  that sprang 
suddenly  into the  air with a  yell like an embattled  army, and came  down 
again into the Water with a hiss like a  hundred hot snakes.  And there  was 
also one last surprise,  in  honour of Bilbo,  and  it startled  the hobbits 
exceedingly, as  Gandalf intended. The lights went out. A great  smoke  went 
up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow 
at  the summit. It spouted green  and scarlet flames. Out flew a  red-golden 
dragon - not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his 
eyes glared down; there  was  a  roar, and he whizzed three  times  over the 
heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and  many fell fla t on their faces. The 
dragon passed like an  express train,  turned a  somersault, and  burst over  
Bywater with a deafening explosion. 
     'That is  the  signal for  supper!'  said  Bilbo.  The  pain  and alarm 
vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits  leaped to their feet. There  was 
a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that  is, except those invited 
to the special family dinner -party. This was held in the great pavilion with 
the tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called 

####-by the hobbits one Gross, though  the  word was not considered proper to use 
of people); and  the  guests were selected  from  all  the families to which 
Bilbo and Frodo were related, with  the addition of a  few special unrelated 
friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits  were included, and present by 
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in  the 
matter  of  sitting up late,  especially when there  was a chance of getting 
them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender. 
     There  were  many  Bagginses  and  Boffins,  and also  many  Tooks  and 
Brandybucks;  there  were  various  Grubbs   (relations  of  Bilbo  Baggins' 
grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and a 
selection  of  Burrowses,  Bolgers, Bracegirdles,  Brockhouses,  Goodbodies, 
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly 
connected 
with Bilbo, and  some of them  had hardly ever  been in Hobbiton before,  as 
they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses  were not 
forgotten.  Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo  and 
detested Frodo,  but  so magnificent  was the invitation  card,  written  in 
golden ink, that  they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides,  their 
cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing  in  food for many years and  his table 
had a high reputation. 
     All  the  one hundred  and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast; 
though they  rather  dreaded  the  after -dinner  speech  of their  host  (an 
inevitable item). He was liable to drag  in bits of  what he  called poetry; 
and sometimes, after  a glass or two, would  allude to the absurd adventures 
of his mysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very 
pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant, varied, 
and prolonged. The  purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout 
the district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo's catering had  depleted the 
stocks of most stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did not 
matter much. 
     After  the feast (more or less) came the  Speech. Most of  the  company 
were, however, now in a tolerant  mood, at that  delightful stage which they 
called 'filling up  the corners'.  They were sipping their favourite drinks,  
and nibbling at  their favourite  dainties, and their fears  were forgotten. 
They were prepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop. 
     My dear People, began Bilbo, rising in  his  place. 'Hear! Hear! Hear!' 
they shouted,  and  kept on repeating  it  in chorus,  seeming  reluctant to 

####-follow their own advice. Bilbo left  his place and went and stood on a chair 
under the illuminated  tree. The  light of the lanterns fell on his  beaming 
face; the golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They could 
all see  him standing,  waving  one hand in  the air,  the other  was in his 
trouser-pocket. 
     My dear Bagginses and Boffins, he began again;  and my  dear  Tooks and 
Brandybucks, and Grubbs,  and  Chubbs,  and Burrowses,  and Hornblowers, 
and 
Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Goodbodies, Brockhouses and Proudfoots.  
'ProudFEET!' 
shouted  an  elderly  hobbit  from  the back  of the pavilion.  His name, of 
course, was  Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, exceptionally 
furry, and both were on the table. 
     Proudfoots,  repeated Bilbo. Also my  good  Sackville -Bagginses that  I 
welcome  back at last  to  Bag  End. Today  is my  one  hundred and eleventh  
birthday: I am eleventy -one  today! 'Hurray!  Hurray! Many  Happy  Returns!' 
they  shouted, and they  hammered  joyously  on the tables.  Bilbo was doing 
splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious.  
     / hope you  are  all  enjoying yourselves as much as  I  am.  Deafening 
cheers. Cries  of  Yes  (and  No). Noises  of trumpets and horns, pipes  and 
flutes,  and  other musical instruments.  There were, as has been said, many 
young hobbits present. Hundreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of 
them bore the  mark DALE  on them; which did not  convey much to most of 
the 
hobbits, but they all agreed they were  marvellous crackers.  They contained 
instruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one 
corner some of  the young Tooks and  Brandybucks, supposing Uncle  Bilbo  to 
have finished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got up 
an impromptu orchestra, and began a  merry dance-tune.  Master  Everard Took  
and  Miss Melilot Brandybuck  got on a  table  and with bells in their hands 
began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous. 
     But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster near by, he 
blew  three loud  hoots. The noise subsided. /  shall not keep you  long, he 
cried. Cheers from all the assembly. /  have called  you all  together for a  
Purpose. Something in  the way  that he said this made an impression.  There 
was almost silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears. 
     Indeed,  for  Three  Purposes! First of  all,  to  tell  you that  I am 

####-immensely fond  of  you all, and that eleventy -one years is too short a time 
to live among such  excellent and  admirable hobbits. Tremendous outburst of 
approval. 
     / don't know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less 
than half of you half as well as you deserve. This was unexpected and rather  
difficult. There  was some scattered clapping, but most of  them were trying 
to work it out and see if it came to a compliment. 
     Secondly,  to  celebrate my birthday.  Cheers again.  / should say: OUR 
birthday.  For it  is, of  course, also the birthday of my  heir and nephew,  
Frodo.  He comes  of  age  and into his inheritance today. Some  perfunctory 
clapping by the  elders;  and some loud  shouts of 'Frodo!  Frodo! Jolly old 
Frodo,' from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered what 
was  meant by 'coming  into his inheritance'. Together we score one  hundred  
and forty -four.  Your numbers were chosen to  fit this remarkable total: One 
Gross, if I  may use the  expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of 
his guests, and especially  the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted,  feeling 
sure they had only been asked to fill up the  required number, like goods in 
a package. 'One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.' 
     It is also,  if  I  may be  allowed to  refer to  ancient history,  the 
anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the 
fact that it was  my birthday slipped  my memory on that occasion. I was only  
fifty-one  then,  and birthdays did  not seem so important.  The banquet was  
very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and 
could only say 'thag you very  buch'. I now repeat  it more correctly: Thank 
you  very  much for coming  to my little party. Obstinate  silence. They all  
feared that  a song or some poetry was now imminent;  and they  were getting 
bored. Why couldn't he stop talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo  
did not sing or recite. He paused for a moment. 
     Thirdly  and finally, he said,  I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT. He 
spoke 
this last word so  loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who still could. 
I regret to announce that - though, as I said, eleventy -one years is far too 
short a time to spend among you - this is the END. I am going. I  am leaving 
NOW. GOOD-BYE! 
     He stepped down and  vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, and 
the guests  all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be 
seen. One hundred  and forty-four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless.  

####-Old  Odo Proudfoot  removed his feet from the table and stamped. Then  there 
was  a  dead  silence,  until  suddenly, after  several deep breaths,  every 
Baggins,  Boffin,   Took,   Brandybuck,   Grubb,  Chubb,  Burrows,   Bolger, 
Bracegirdle,  Brockhouse, Goodbody, Hornblower, and  Proudfoot began to 
talk  
at once. 
     It  was generally agreed that the joke was  in very bad taste, and more 
food and drink were needed to cure the guests  of shock and annoyance. 'He's 
mad. I always said so,'  was probably  the  most  popular comment.  Even the 
Tooks (with a few exceptions) thought  Bilbo's behaviour was absurd. For the 
moment most of  them took it for granted that his disappearance was  nothing 
more than a ridiculous prank. 
     But old Rory Brandybuck was not  so sure. Neither age  nor an  enormous 
dinner  had clouded his wits, and he said to his daughter -in-law, Esmeralda: 
'There's something fishy in this, my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off 
again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He hasn't taken the vittles with him.' 
He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again. 
     Frodo  was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time  he 
had  sat silent  beside  Bilbo's  empty  chair,  and ignored all remarks and 
questions. He had enjoyed the  joke,  of course, even  though he had been in 
the  know. He had  difficulty  in  keeping  from  laughter at the  indignant 
surprise of  the guests.  But  at the  same time he felt deeply troubled: he 
realized  suddenly  that he loved the old hobbit  dearly. Most of the guests 
went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins' oddities, past and 
present;  but the Sackville-Bagginses had already  departed in wrath.  Frodo 
did not want to have any more  to do with the party. He gave orders for more 
wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass  silently to the 
health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion. 
     As for Bilbo Baggins,  even while he was making his speech, he had been 
fingering the golden ring   in his pocket:  his magic ring that he  had  kept 
secret for so many years. As he  stepped  down he slipped it on his  finger, 
and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again. 
     He walked  briskly back to his hole, and stood  for a moment  listening 
with a smile to the din in  the pavilion and to the sounds of merrymaking in 
other parts  of the field. Then he  went in.  He took off his party clothes,  
folded up and wrapped  in tissue-paper his  embroidered  silk waistcoat, and 
put it away. Then he put on quickly  some old untidy  garments, and fastened 

####-round his  waist a  worn leather  belt.  On it  he  hung a short sword in  a  
battered  black-leather  scabbard.  From  a  locked  drawer,   smelling   of 
moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood . They had been locked up as if 
they were very precious, but they were  so  patched and weatherstained  that 
their  original  colour  could hardly be guessed: it might  have  been  dark 
green. They were rather too large for him. He then  went into his study, and 
from  a  large  strong-box  took out a bundle  wrapped in  old cloths, and a  
leather -bound  manuscript; and  also a large bulky  envelope.  The  book and  
bundle  he stuffed  into  the top  of a heavy  bag  that was standing there, 
already nearly full.  Into the envelope he slipped his  golden ring, and its 
fine chain, and then  sealed it, and addressed it  to Frodo. At first he put 
it  on the mantelpiece,  but  suddenly  he  removed it and  stuck  it in his 
pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in. 
     'Hullo!' said Bilbo. 'I wondered if you would turn up.' 
     'I am glad to find you visible,' replied the wizard, sitting down  in a  
chair, 'I wanted to catch you and have a few final words. I suppose you feel 
that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?' 
     'Yes,  I do,' said  Bilbo. "Though that flash was surprising: it  quite 
startled  me,  let alone the  others. A  little  addition  of  your  own,  I 
suppose?' 
     It was. You have  wisely kept that ring secret all these  years, and it 
seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that would seem to 
explain your sudden vanishment.' 
     'And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,' laughed 
Bilbo, 'but I expect you know best, as usual.' 
     'I do - when I  know  anything. But I  don't  feel too  sure about this 
whole affair. It has now come  to the  final point. You have had  your joke, 
and alarmed or offended most  of your relations, and  given the whole  Shire 
something to talk about for nine  days, or ninety-nine more  likely. Are you  
going any further?' 
     'Yes, I am. I feel  I  need a holiday, a very  long holiday, as I  have 
told  you before. Probably  a  permanent holiday:  I  don't expect  I  shall 
return. In fact, I don't mean to, and I have made all arrangements. 
     'I  am  old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I am beginning to feel it in 
my heart  of hearts.  Well-preserved indeed!' he snorted.  'Why, I feel  all 
thin, sort of stretched, if you  know what I mean: like butter that has been 
scraped  over too  much bread.  That can't  be right. I need  a  change,  or  

####-something.' 
     Gandalf  looked curiously  and closely at him.  'No,  it does not  seem 
right,' he said thoughtfully. 'No, after all I believe your plan is probably 
the best.' 
     'Well, I've made  up  my mind,  anyway. I  want to see mountains again, 
Gandalf, mountains, and then  find somewhere where I can  rest. In peace and 
quiet, without a lot  of relatives prying around, and a string of confounded 
visitors hanging on the bell.  I might find somewhere where I  can finish my 
book. I  have thought  of  a nice ending for it:  and he lived happily  ever 
after to the end of his days. ' 
     Gandalf laughed. I hope he will. But nobody will read the book, however  
it ends.' 
     'Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as 
it has gone. You'll keep an eye on Frodo, won't you?' 
     'Yes, I will  - two eyes, as often as I can spare them.' 
     'He would come with  me, of  course, if I asked him. In fact he offered 
to once, just before the party. But he does not really want to, yet.  I want 
to  see  the  wild country again before I die, and  the Mountains; but he is 
still in love with the Shire, with woods and  fields  and  little rivers. He 
ought to  be comfortable here. I  am leaving everything  to him,  of course, 
except a few oddments. I  hope he will be happy,  when he gets used to being 
on his own. It's time he was his own master now.' 
     'Everything?' said Gandalf. 'The ring  as well? You agreed to that, you  
remember.' 
     'Well, er, yes, I suppose so,' stammered Bilbo.  
     'Where is it?' 
     'In an envelope, if you must know,'  said Bilbo impatiently. 'There  on 
the mantelpiece. Well,  no! Here it is in  my  pocket!' He hesitated.  'Isn't 
that odd now?'  he  said  softly  to himself. 'Yet after all,  why  not? Why 
shouldn't it stay there?' 
     Gandalf looked again very hard  at  Bilbo, and there was a gleam in his 
eyes.  'I think, Bilbo,' he said  quietly, 'I should leave  it behind. Don't  
you want to?' 
     'Well yes  - and no. Now it comes to it, I don't like parting with it at 
all, I may say. And I don't really see why I should. Why do you want me to?' 
he asked, and a  curious  change came  over  his voice.  It  was sharp  with 

####-suspicion and annoyance. 'You are always badgering me about my ring; but 
you 
have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.' 
     'No, but I had to  badger  you,'  said Gandalf. 'I wanted the truth. It 
was  important. Magic  rings  are  - well, magical; and  they are  rare  and 
curious. I was  professionally interested in  your ring, you may say;  and I 
still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also 
I  think you  have had  it quite long  enough. You won't need it  any  more. 
Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.' 
     Bilbo  flushed, and there  was an angry light in  his eyes.  His kindly 
face  grew hard. 'Why  not?'  he  cried. 'And what business is it of  yours, 
anyway, to know what I  do with my own things? It is my own. I found  it. It  
came to me.' 
     'Yes, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no need to get angry.' 
     'If I am  it  is your  fault,' said Bilbo. 'It is mine, I  tell you. My 
own. My precious. Yes, my precious.' 
     The wizard's face remained grave and attentive,  and  only a flicker in 
his deep eyes showed that he  was startled and indeed  alarmed. 'It has been 
called that before,' he said,  'but not by you.' 
     'But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It's 
not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.' 
     Gandalf stood  up. He  spoke  sternly. 'You will be  a fool if  you do. 
Bilbo,' he said. 'You make that clearer with every word you say. It has  got 
far  too much  hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go yourself, and  be 
free.' 
     'I'll do as I choose and go as I please,' said Bilbo obstinately. 
     'Now, now, my dear hobbit!  ' said Gandalf. 'All your long life we have 
been  friends, and you owe me something. Come!  Do as you promised: give  it 
up!  ' 
     'Well,  if  you  want my ring yourself, say  so!' cried Bilbo. 'But you  
won't get it.  I won't give my precious away, I tell  you.' His hand strayed 
to the hilt of his small sword. 
     Gandalf's eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry soon,' he said. 
If  you  say  that again,  I shall.  Then  you  will  see Gandalf  the  Grey 
uncloaked.'  He took a step towards the hobbit,  and he seemed to  grow tall 
and menacing; his shadow filled the little room. 
     Bilbo backed away  to the  wall, brea thing hard, his hand  clutching at 

####-his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another,  and the  air of  the 
room tingled. Gandalf's  eyes remained bent on the hobbit. Slowly  his hands 
relaxed, and he began to tremble. 
     'I  don't know  what has  come  over  you, Gandalf,' he said. 'You have 
never been like this  before. What is it all  about? It is mine isn't it?  I 
found it, and Gollum would  have killed  me, if I hadn't kept it. I'm not  a  
thief, whatever he said.' 
     'I have  never called  you  one,' Gandalf answered. 'And  I  am not one 
either. I am not trying to rob you,  but to help you. I wish you would trust  
me,  as  you  used.' He turned  away, and the  shadow  passed. He  seemed to 
dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled. 
     Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. I am sorry,' he said. 'But I felt so 
queer.  And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with it any 
more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was 
like an eye  looking at me.  And  I  am  always  wanting  to put it  on  and 
disappear, don't you know; or wondering if it is safe, and pulling it out to 
make sure. I tried locking it up, but  I found I couldn't rest without it in 
my pocket. I don't know why. And I don't seem able to make up my mind.' 
     'Then  trust mine,'  said Gandalf. 'It is quite  made  up.  Go away and 
leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after  
him.' 
     Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he sighed. 'All 
right,' he said with an effort. I will.' Then he shrugged his shoulders, and 
smiled rather ruefully. 'After  all that's what this party business  was all 
about, really: to  give away lots of birthday presents,  and somehow make it  
easier to give it away at the same time. It hasn't made it any easier in the 
end, but it would be  a pity  to waste  all my  preparations. It would quite 
spoil the joke.' 
     'Indeed  it would take  away the only point I ever saw in the  affair,' 
said Gandalf. 
     'Very well,' said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo  with all the rest.' He drew 
a  deep breath. 'And  now I  really must be starting, or somebody else  will 
catch  me.  I  have  said good-bye, and I couldn't bear  to  do it  all over  
again.' He picked up his bag and moved to the  door. 
     'You  have  still got the ring in your pocket,' said the wizard. 'Well, 
so I have!' cried Bilbo. 'And my will and  all  the other documents too. You  
had better take it and deliver it for me. That will be safest.' 

####-     'No,  don't give  the  ring  to  me,'  said  Gandalf. 'Put  it  on  the 
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough  there, till Frodo comes.  I  shall wait 
for him.' 
     Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as  he was about to set it by the 
clock, his hand jerked back, and the  packet fell  on  the floor.  Before he 
could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and  set it in its place. 
A spasm  of anger passed swiftly over  the hobbit's  face again. Suddenly it 
gave way to a look of relief and a laugh. 'Well, that's that,' he said.  'Now 
I'm off!' 
     They went out into the hall.  Bilbo chose  his favourite stick from the 
stand; then he  whistled.  Three  dwarves came out of  different rooms where 
they had been busy. 
     'Is everything ready?' asked Bilbo. 'Everything packed and la belled?' 
     'Everything,' they answered. 
     'Well, let's start then!' He stepped out of the front-door. 
     It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked 
up,  sniffing  the air. 'What fun! What fun to be off again, off on the  Road 
with dwarves!  This  is  what  I  have  really  been longing for, for years! 
Good-bye!  ' he said, looking  at  his old  home and  bowing  to  the  door. 
'Good-bye, Gandalf!' 
     'Good-bye, for the present,  Bilbo. Take  care of yourself! You are old 
enough, and perhaps wise enough.' 
     'Take care! I  don't care. Don't  you worry about me! I am as happy now 
as I have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time has come. 
I am being swept off my feet at last,' he added, and then in a low voice, as 
if to himself, he sang softly in the dark: 
     The Road goes ever on and on  
     Down from the door where it began. 
     Now far ahead the Road has gone, 
     And I must follow, if I can, 
     Pursuing it with eager feet, 
     Until it joins some larger way 
     Where many paths and errands meet. 
     And whither then? I cannot say. 
     He  paused, silent for a moment.  Then without another  word he  turned 
away from the lights and voices in the fields and tents, and followed by his 
three  companions  went round  into  his garden,  and trotted  down the long  

####-sloping path. He  jumped over  a low place in the hedge  at the bottom,  and  
took to the meadows, passing into the night like a  rustle  of wind  in  the 
grass. 
     Gandalf  remained for a  while  staring  after  him  into the darkness. 
'Goodbye,  my dear Bilbo  - until our next meeting!' he said softly and went 
back indoors. 
     Frodo came  in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep 
in thought. 'Has he gone?' he asked. 
     'Yes,' answered Gandalf, 'he has gone at last.' 
     ' I wish - I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a joke,' 
said Frodo. 'But I knew in my heart  that he  really  meant to go. He always 
used to  joke about serious things. I  wish  I had come back sooner, just to 
see him off.' 
     I  think really  he preferred slipping off quietly  in the  end,'  said 
Gandalf. 'Don't be too troubled. He'll be all right -  now. He left a packet 
for you. There it is!' 
     Frodo  took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and  glanced  at it, but 
did not open it. 
     'You'll find  his  will and all the other documents in there, I think,' 
said  the  wizard.  'You  are  the master of Bag End now. And also, I fancy, 
you'll find a golden ring.' 
     'The ring!' exclaimed Frodo. 'Has he left me that? I wonder why. Still, 
it may be useful.' 
     'It may, and it  may  not,' said Gandalf. 'I should not make use of it, 
if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed.' 
     As master of Bag End Frodo felt  it his painful duty to say good-bye to 
the guests. Rumours of strange events had by  now spread all over the field,  
but  Frodo would  only say  no doubt everything will be  cleared  up  in the 
morning.  About  midnight carriages  came for the important folk. One by one 
they rolled away, filled with full but  very  unsatisfied hobbits. Gardeners 
came   by  arrangement,   and  removed  in  wheel-barrows  those   that  had 
inadvertently remained behind. 
     Night slowly  passed.  The  sun  rose. The  hobbits rose  rather later. 
Morning  went  on.  People  came  and began (by  orders) to  clear away  the 
pavilions  and the  tables  and the chairs,  and the  spoons and  knives and 
bottles and plates, and the lanterns, and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and 
the  crumbs  and   cracker -paper,  the  forgotten   bags  and   gloves   and 

####-handkerchiefs,  and  the uneaten food (a very small  item). Then a number of 
other people came (without orders): Bagginses, and Boffins, and Bolgers, and 
Tooks, and other  guests that lived or  were staying near.  By mid-day, when 
even the best -fed were out and about again,  there  was a large crowd at Bag 
End, uninvited but not unexpected. 
     Frodo  was waiting on the step, smiling, but  looking rather  tired and 
worried. He welcomed all  the callers,  but he had not much more to say than 
before. His reply to all inquiries  was simply this: 'Mr. Bilbo  Baggins has 
gone away; as far as I know, for good.'  Some of  the visitors he invited to 
come inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them. 
     Inside in the  hall there  was piled a large assortment of packages and 
parcels and small articles  of furniture.  On  every item there was  a label 
tied. There were several labels of this sort: 
     For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo, on an umbrella. 
Adelard 
had carried off many unlabelled ones. 
     For  DORA BAGGINS in  memory  of  a LONG correspondence, with love 
from 
Bilbo, on a large waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo's sister and the eldest  
surviving female  relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine,  and had 
written reams of good advice for more than half a century. 
     For  MILO BURROWS,  hoping it will be  useful, from B.B., on a gold pen 
and ink -bottle. Milo never answered letters.  
     For ANGELICA'S use, from Uncle Bilbo, on a round convex mirror. She 
was 
a young Baggins, and too obviously considered her face shapely. 
     For  the  collection  of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE,  from a  contributor,  on an 
(empty) book -case. Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than  usual 
at returning them. 
     For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS,  as  a PRESENT,  on  a  case  of  
silver 
spoons. Bilbo  believed that  she had  acquired a good  many of  his spoons,  
while he was away  on his former journey. Lobelia knew that quite well. When 
she arrived later in the day, she took the point  at once, but she also took  
the spoons.  
     This  is  only  a  small  selection of  the assembled presents. Bilbo's 
residence had got rather cluttered up  with things in the course of his long 

####-life.  It was a  tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered up: for which the 
custom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely responsible.  Not, of 
course,  that the  birthday-presents  were always new,  there were one or two 
old mathoms  of forgotten uses that had circulated all around  the district; 
but Bilbo had usually given new presents, and  kept  those that he received. 
The old hole was now being cleared a little. 
     Every  one  of  the various  parting  gifts  had  labels,  written  out 
personally  by Bilbo,  and several had some point,  or  some  joke.  But, of 
course,  most  of the  things were  given where  they  would  be  wanted and 
welcome. The  poorer hobbits, and especially  those of Bagshot Row, did very 
well. Old Gaffer  Gamgee got  two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a  woollen 
waistcoat,  and  a   bottle  of  ointment  for  creaking  joints.  Old  Rory 
Brandybuck,  in  return  for  much  hospitality, got a dozen  bottles of Old 
Winyards: a strong red wine from the Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as 
it had been laid down by Bilbo's father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted 
him a capital fellow after the first bottle. 
     There was plenty of everything left for Frodo.  And, of course, all the 
chief  treasures, as well  as  the  books,  pictures, and  more than  enough 
furniture,  were  left  in his possession. There was,  however, no sign  nor  
mention of money or jewellery: not a  penny-piece or  a glass bead was given 
away. 
     Frodo had a  very  trying time that afternoon. A fa lse rumour  that the 
whole household was being distributed free spread like wildfire; and  before 
long  the place was packed with  people who had no business there, but could 
not be kept out. Labels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Some  
people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others tried to make off 
with minor  items not  addressed to  them,  or  with  anything  that  seemed 
unwanted  or unwatched.  The road to the gate  was blocked  with barrows and 
handcarts.  
     In the middle of  the  commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo  
had retired for a while and left his  friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye 
on things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely.  
     'He is indisposed,' he said. 'He is resting.' 
     'Hiding, you mean,'  said  Lobelia. 'Anyway we want  to see him and  we 
mean to see him. Just go and tell him so!' 
     Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to discover  
their parting gift  of spoons. It did  not improve their tempers. Eventually 

####-they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a  table with a lot  of 
papers in front of him. He looked indisposed - to see Sackville-Bagginses at 
any  rate;  and he stood up,  fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he 
spoke quite politely. 
     The Sackville-Bagginses were  rather offensive. They began  by offering 
him  bad  bargain-prices  (as between  friends)  for  various  valuable  and 
unlabelled  things.  When  Frodo  replied  that  only  the  things specially 
directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very 
fishy. 
     'Only one thing  is clear to me,' said Otho, 'and that  is that you are 
doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.' 
     Otho would  have been Bilbo's heir, but for  the  adoption of Frodo. He 
read the will carefully and  snorted. It was,  unfortunately, very clear and 
correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other  
things seven signatures of witnesses in red ink). 
     'Foiled again!' he said  to his  wife. 'And after waiting sixty   years.  
Spoons? Fiddlesticks!' He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumped 
off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out 
of the study  to see how things were going  on and found her still about the 
place, investigating nooks  and comers and  tapping the  floors. He escorted 
her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but 
rather valuable) articles that had somehow fallen inside  her umbrella.  Her  
face looked as if  she was in the throes of thinking out a  really  crushing 
parting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:  
     'You'll live to regret  it, young  fellow! Why  didn't you  go too? You  
don't belong here; you're no Baggins  - you - you're a Brandybuck!' 
     'Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,' said Frodo 
as he shut the door on her. 
     'It was a compliment,' said Merry  Brandybuck, 'and so, of  course, not 
true.' 
     Then they went  round the hole,  and  evicted three  young hobbits (two 
Boffins and a Bolger) who were knocking  holes  in the  walls  of one of the 
cellars.  Frodo  also had a  tussle  with young Sancho  Proudfoot  (old  Odo 
Proudfoot's  grandson),  who had  begun an  excavation in the larger pantry, 
where  he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited both 
curiosity  and  hope;  for legendary  gold  (mysteriously obtained,  if  not  
positively ill-gotten), is, as every  one  knows, any one's for  the  finding 

####--unless the search is interrupted. 
     When he had overcome  Sancho and  pushed him out, Frodo  collapsed on a  
chair in the hall. It's time to  close the shop, Merry,'  he said. 'Lock the 
door, and don't open it to anyone today,  not even if they bring a battering 
ram.' Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea. 
     He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the front-door. 
'Lobelia again most likely,' he thought. 'She must have thought of something 
really nasty, and have come back again to say it. It can wait.' 
     He went on  with his tea.  The knock was repeated,  much louder, but he 
took no notice. Suddenly the wizard's head appeared at the window.  
     'If you don't let me in, Frodo, I  shall blow your door right down your 
hole and out through the hill,' he said. 
     'My dear Gandalf! Half a  minute!' cried Frodo, running out of the room 
to the door. 'Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.' 
     'Then I  forgive you.  But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-trap 
towards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk.' 
     'She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo's 
ring. I longed to disappear.' 
     'Don't do that!'  said  Gandalf, sitting down. 'Do be  careful of  that 
ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last 
word.' 
     'Well, what about it?' 
     'What do you know already?' 
     'Only  what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, and 
how he used it: on his journey, I mean.' 
     'Which story, I wonder,' said Gandalf.  
     'Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,' said Frodo. 'He 
told me  the  true story  soon after I  came to live here.  He said  you had 
pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. "No secrets between 
us,  Frodo,"  he  said;  "but  they are not  to go  any  further. It's  mine 
anyway."' 
     'That's interesting,' said Gandalf.  'Well,  what did  you  think of it 
all?' 
     'If you mean, inventing all that about a "present",  well, I thought the 
true story much more likely, and I  couldn't see the point of altering it at 
all. It was very  unlike Bilbo to do  so,  anyway; and I thought  it  rather  
odd.' 

####-     'So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures 
- if  they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very careful  with it. 
It may have other powers than just making you vanish when you wish to.' 
     'I don't understand,' said Frodo. 
     'Neither do I,'  answered  the wizard. 'I have  merely begun  to wonder  
about the ring,  especially since last night. No need to worry.  But if  you  
take my  advice you will use it very  seldom, or not at  all. At least I beg 
you not  to use it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say 
again: keep it safe, and keep it secret!' 
     'You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?' 
     'I am not certain, so I  will say no  more. I may  be able to  tell you  
something  when I come back. I am going off at once: so this is good-bye for 
the present.' He got up. 
     'At  once!' cried Frodo.  'Why,  I thought  you were staying  on for at 
least a week. I was looking forward to your help.' 
     'I did mean to  - but I have had to change my mind. I  may be away for a  
good while;  but  I'll come and see you again, as soon  as I  can. Expect me 
when you see me! I shall  slip in quietly.  I  shan't often be visiting  the 
Shire openly again.  I find that I have become rather unpopular. They  say I 
am a  nuisance  and  a  disturber  of the  peace. Some people  are  actually 
accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is 
supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.' 
     'Some  people!'  exclaimed Frodo.  'You  mean  Otho  and  Lobelia.  How 
abominable!  I would give  them Bag  End and everything else, if I could get  
Bilbo back  and go off tramping in the country with  him. I  love the Shire. 
But I begin to  wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever  
see him again.' 
     'So do I,' said Gandalf. 'And  I wonder many other things. Good-bye now!  
Take  care  of  yourself!  Look out  for  me, especially at  unlikely times!  
Good-bye!' 
     Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walked 
off at a surprising pace; but Frodo  thought the  old wizard looked unusually 
bent, almost  as if  he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing 
in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not 
see him again for a long time. 
 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 2.</h4> <br> The Shadow of the Past 

 
 
     The talk did not die down in nine  or even ninety-nine days. The second 
disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all 
over the Shire,  for a year  and a day,  and was remembered much longer than 
that.  It became  a fireside -story for  young  hobbits;  and eventually  Mad 
Baggins,  who used to vanish with a  bang and a flash and reappear with bags 
of jewels and gold, became a favourite character of legend and lived on long  
after all the true events were forgotten. 
     But in the meantime, the general opinion in the  neighbourhood was that 
Bilbo, who  had always been rather cracked, had at  last gone quite mad, and  
had run off into the Blue. There he had  undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a  
river and  come to a tragic,  but  hardly an  untimely, end.  The blame  was 
mostly laid on Gandalf. 
     'If only that  dratted  wizard will leave young  Frodo  alone,  perhaps 
he'll  settle  down  and  grow some  hobbit-sense,'  they said. And  to  all 
appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down, but the  
growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once  began to  
carry on Bilbo's reputation for oddity. He  refused to go into mourning; and 
the next  year  he gave a party  in  honour of  Bilbo's  hundred-and-twelfth 
birthday, which he  called Hundred-weight Feast. But that was  short  of the 
mark, for twenty guests were invited  and  there were several meals at which  
it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say. 
     Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving 
Bilbo's  Birthday Party year after year  until  they got used to it. He said 
that he did not think Bilbo  was dead. When  they asked: 'Where is he then?' 
he shrugged his shoulders. 
     He lived  alone, as Bilbo had done; but he  had  a  good  many friends, 
especially among  the younger hobbits  (mostly descendants  of the Old Took) 
who  had  as children been fond of  Bilbo  and often in and out of Bag  End.  
Folco Boffin and Fredegar  Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends 
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin),  and Merry Brandybuck  (his real 
name was Meriadoc, but  that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping 
all 
over  the Shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to the 
amazement of  sensible folk he was sometimes  seen far  from home walking in 

####-the hills and woods under the starlight.  Merry and Pippin suspected that he 
visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had done. 
     As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of 
good 'preservation':  outwardly he retained the appearance  of a  robust and 
energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. 'Some folk have all the luck,' they 
said;  but it was not until Frodo approached the  usually more  sober age of 
fifty that they began to think it queer. 
     Frodo himself, after the first shock, found  that being his  own master  
and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End  was rather  pleasant. For some  years he was 
quite  happy and did not  worry much about the  future. But half unknown  to 
himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was  steadily growing. He 
found himself  wondering at times,  especially in the autumn, about the wild 
lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his 
dreams. He began to sa y to himself: 'Perhaps I shall cross the  River myself 
one day.' To which the other half of his mind always replied: 'Not yet.' 
     So it  went on,  until his forties were  running  out, and his fiftieth 
birthday  was  drawing  near:  fifty  was a number   that he felt was somehow 
significant (or ominous); it was at any  rate at that age that adventure had 
suddenly  befallen  Bilbo. Frodo began to feel  restless, and the  old paths 
seemed too well-trodden. He  looked at maps, and  wondered  what lay  beyond 
their edges: maps made  in the Shire showed  mostly  white spaces beyond its 
borders.  He took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and 
Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking 
and talking with the strange  wayfarers that began at this time to appear in 
the Shire. 
     There were rumours of  strange things happening in the  world  outside; 
and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several 
years, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the 
Shire, could  now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening, 
passing and  not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and  were  no  
longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road 
in  unusual numbers. The ancient East -West Road ran through the Shire to its 
end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their 
mines in the Blue Mountains. They  were the  hobbits' chief  source of  news 
from distant parts  - if they  wanted any: as a rule  dwarves said little and 
hobbits  asked  no  more.  But now Frodo  often met strange dwarves  of  far  
countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in 

####-whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor. 
     That name  the hobbits  only knew in legends  of the  dark past, like a  
shadow  in  the  background  of their  memories;  but  it  was  ominous  and 
disquieting. It seemed that the  evil power in Mirkwood had been  driven out 
by the White Council  only  to  reappear  in  greater  strength  in the  old 
strongholds of Mordor. The  Dark Tower had been rebuilt,  it was  said. From 
there the  power was spreading far and  wide,  and away far  east  and south 
there were  wars and  growing  fear.  Orcs were  multiplying  again  in  the  
mountains. Trolls were abroad, no longer dull-witted, but  cunning and armed 
with  dreadful  weapons.  And there  were  murmured  hints of creatures more 
terrible than all these, but they had no name. 
     Little of all this,  of  course, reached the ears of  ordinary hobbits. 
But  even the deafest  and most stay-at-home began to hear queer  tales; and 
those whose business  took  them  to  the  borders  saw strange  things. The 
conversation in The  Green Dragon at Bywater,  one evening in the spring  of 
Frodo's  fiftieth year,  showed that  even in the comfortable  heart of  the 
Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them. 
     Sam Gamgee was sitting in one  corner near the fire,  and opposite  him 
was Ted  Sandyman, the  miller's son;  and there  were various  other rustic 
hobbits listening to their talk. 
     'Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,' said Sam. 
     'Ah,'  said  Ted, 'you do, if you listen. But I can hear fireside-tales 
and children's stories at home, if I want to.' 
     'No doubt you can,' retorted Sam, 'and I daresay  there's more truth in 
some of them than you reckon.  Who invented the stories anyway? Take 
dragons 
now.' 
     'No thank 'ee,' said  Ted, 'I won't.  I heard tell of them when I was a  
youngster, but there's no  call to  believe in  them  now. There's  only one 
Dragon in Bywater, and that's Green,' he said, getting a general laugh. 
     'All  right,' said  Sam, laughing with the rest. 'But  what about these 
Tree-men, these giants, as you might call  them? They do say that one bigger 
than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back.' 
     'Who's they?' 
     'My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes up 
to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He saw one.' 
     'Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal's always saying  he's seen  things; and 

####-maybe he sees things that ain't there.' 
     'But  this  one was as big  as an elm tree, and walking - walking seven 
yards to a stride, if it was an inch.' 
     'Then I bet it wasn't an inch. What he saw was an elm  tree, as like as 
not.' 
     'But this one was  walking, I tell you; and there  ain't no elm tree on 
the North Moors.' 
     'Then Hal can't have  seen one,' said Ted. There  was some laughing and 
clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point. 
     'All  the same,'  said  Sam,  'you can't deny  that others besides  our 
Halfast have seen  queer  folk crossing the  Shire  - crossing  it, mind you: 
there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders  have never  
been so busy before. 
     'And I've heard tell  that Elves are moving west. They do  say they are 
going to the harbours, out away beyond the  White Towers.' Sam waved his 
arm 
vaguely: neither he nor  any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the 
old towers  beyond  the western borders  of the  Shire. But  it was  an  old 
tradition that  away over  there stood the Grey  Havens, from which at times 
elven-ships set sail, never to return. 
     'They are sailing,  sailing, sailing over the Sea,  they are going into 
the West  and  leaving us,' said  Sam, half chanting the words, shaking  his 
head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed. 
     'Well,  that isn't anything  new, if you believe the  old tales.   And I 
don't see  what it matters to me or you.  Let  them sail!  But I warrant you  
haven't seen them doing it; nor any one else in the Shire.' 
     'Well I don't  know,' said Sam  thoughtfully. He believed he  had  once 
seen an Elf in the  woods, and still hoped to  see more one  day. Of all the 
legends  that he had heard in his  early  years such fragments of tales  and 
half-remembered  stories  about  the Elves as the hobbits knew,  had  always 
moved him  most deeply. 'There  are some,  even in these parts, as  know the 
Fair Folk and get news  of them,'  he said. 'There's Mr. Baggins now, that I 
work for. He told me  that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves.  
And old Mr. Bilbo knew more:  many's the  talk I had with  him  when I was a  
little lad.' 
     'Oh, they're both cracked,' said Ted. 'Leastways old Bilbo was cracked, 
and Frodo's cracking. If that's where  you get your news from, you'll  never  

####-want for moonshine. Well,  friends,  I'm  off home.  Your  good  health!' He 
drained his mug and  went out noisily. 
     Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think about. For  
one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden, and he would have 
a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But 
Sam ha d more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up 
and went out. 
     It was  early April and the sky was now clearing after  heavy rain. The 
sun was down,  and  a cool  pale evening was quietly fading  into night.  He 
walked  home  under  the  early stars  through  Hobbiton and  up  the  Hill, 
whistling softly and thoughtfully. 
     It  was  just at  this  time that  Gandalf  reappeared  after his  long 
absence. For three years  after  the Party he had  been away.  Then he  paid 
Frodo a  brief visit,  and after taking a good look at him he went off again. 
During  the  next  year  or  two  he  had  turned  up  fairly often,  coming 
unexpectedly  after  dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise.  He 
would  not  discuss  his  own  business  and  journeys, and  seemed  chiefly 
interested in small news about Frodo's health and doings. 
     Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since Frodo 
had seen or heard of him, and  he had begun  to think that  the wizard would 
never return and  had given up all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as 
Sam was walking home  and twilight was fading, there came the once  familiar 
tap on the study window.  
     Frodo welcomed  his old friend with  surprise  and great delight.  They 
looked hard at one another. 
     'Ah well eh?' said Gandalf. 'You look the same as ever, Frodo!' 
     'So do you,' Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked 
older and  more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wide 
world, and  soon they were  deep in talk, and  they stayed  up far into  the 
night. 
     Next morning after a late breakfast, the  wizard was sitting with Frodo 
by the open  window of the  study. A bright fire was on the hearth,  but the 
sun was warm, and  the  wind was in the  South. Everything looked fresh, and 
the new green of Spring  was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the  
trees' fingers.  
     Gandalf  was thinking of  a  spring,  nearly  eighty years before, when 
Bilbo  had run out  of Bag End without  a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps 

####-whiter  than it  had  been  then,  and his  beard  and eyebrows were perhaps 
longer, and  his face more lined with care and  wisdom; but his eyes were as 
bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke-rings with the same vigour  and 
delight. 
     He was  smoking  now in  silence, for  Frodo was sitting still, deep in 
thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings 
that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence. 
     'Last  night  you  began to  tell  me  strange  things  about  my ring, 
Gandalf,' he said. 'And then you stopped, because you said that such matters 
were best left until  daylight. Don't you think  you  had better finish now?  
You  say the ring  is dangerous,  far mor e  dangerous than  I guess. In what 
way?' 
     'In many  ways,' answered  the wizard. It is far  more powerful than  I 
ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the  end it  would utterly 
overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would possess him. 
     'In Eregion long  ago many Elven-rings  were made,  magic  rings as you  
call them, and they were, of course, of various  kinds: some more potent and 
some  less.  The lesser rings were only essays  in the craft before  it  was 
full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but  trifles  - yet still to my 
mind dangerous for mortals. But  the Great Rings,  the Rings of Power,  they 
were perilous.  
     'A  mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great  Rings, does not die, but 
he does not  grow  or obtain more life, he merely continues, until  at  last 
every minute is a weariness. And if he often  uses the Ring  to make himself 
invisible,  he fades: he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks 
in the twilight under the eye of the  dark power that rules the Rings.  Yes, 
sooner or  later  - later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but 
neither strength nor good purpose will last  - sooner or later the dark power  
will devour him.' 
     'How terrifying!' said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound 
of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden. 
     'How long have you  known this?'  asked Frodo  at length. 'And how much 
did Bilbo know?' 
     'Bilbo knew no  more than he told you, I  am  sure,' said Gandalf.  'He 
would certainly never have  passed on  to you anything that he thought would 
be a danger, even though I  promised to  look after you. He thought the ring  
was very beautiful, and very  useful at  need;  and if anything was wrong or 

####-queer, it was himself. He said that it was "growing on his mind", and he was 
always worrying about it; but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to 
blame.  Though he had found out that  the thing needed looking after; it did 
not seem always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded  in an odd 
way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it had been tight.' 
     'Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,' said Frodo,  'so I have 
always kept it on its chain.' 
     'Very wise,'  said Gandalf.  'But  as for  his long life,   Bilbo  never  
connected  it  with the  ring  at all. He took  all  the credit  for that to 
himself,  and he was very  proud of  it. Though  he was getting restless and 
uneasy.  Thin and  stretched  he  said. A  sign  that  the  ring was getting 
control.' 
     'How long have you known all this?' asked Frodo again. 
     'Known?'  said  Gandalf.  'I  have known  much that only the Wise know,  
Frodo. But  if you mean "known about this ring", well,  I still do not know,  
one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess.  
     'When did I first begin to guess?' he mused, searching back  in memory. 
'Let me see - it was in the year that the White Council drove the dark power  
from Mirkwood,  just before the Battle of Five  Armies, that Bilbo found his 
ring.  A  shadow  fell on my  heart then, though  I did not know  yet what I 
feared. I wondered often how Gollum came  by a Great Ring, as plainly it was 
- that at least was clear from the first. Then I heard Bilbo's strange story 
of how he had "won" it, and I  could not believe it. When I at last  got the 
truth out of him,  I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to 
the  ring beyond  doubt. Much like Gollum  with his "birthday  present". The 
lies were too much alike for my comfort.  Clearly the ring had an unwholesome 
power  that  set to  work on  its keeper at once.  That was the  first  real 
warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were 
better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry. There was little 
else that I could  do.  I could not take it  from him without doing  greater  
harm; and  I had no right to  do so anyway. I could only watch  and wait.  I 
might perhaps have consulted Saruman the White, but something always held 
me 
back.' 
     'Who is he?' asked Frodo. I have never heard of him before.' 
     'Maybe  not,' answered Gandalf. 'Hobbits  are, or were,  no concern  of 
his. Yet he is great among the Wise.  He  is the  chief of  my order and the 

####-head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it,  
and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, 
is  his province. He  has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of their 
making; but when the  Rings  were debated  in the Council, all that he would  
reveal to us of his ring-lore told against my fears. So my doubt slept  - but 
uneasily. Still I watched and I waited. 
     'And all  seemed well  with  Bilbo. And  the  years  passed. Yes,  they 
passed, and  they seemed  not to touch him.  He showed no signs of age.  The 
shadow fell  on me  again. But I said  to  myself: "After all he comes of  a  
long-lived family on his mother's side. There is time yet. Wait!" 
     'And  I waited.  Until  that night when he left this house. He said and 
did things then that  filled me with a  fear that no words  of Saruman could 
allay. I knew at last that something dark and deadly was at work. And I have  
spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.' 
     'There  wasn't  any  permanent  harm  done,  was  there?'  asked  Frodo 
anxiously. 'He would  get all right in time, wouldn't he? Be able to rest in 
peace, I mean?' 
     'He felt better at once,' said Gandalf. 'But there is only one Power in 
this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as I 
know there is no Power  in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among the 
Wise I  am  the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch  of 
knowledge, but  full  of surprises.  Soft as  butter  they  can be,  and yet 
sometimes as tough as old  tree-roots.  I  think it likely  that  some would  
resist the  Rings far longer  than most of the Wise  would believe.  I don't 
think you need worry about Bilbo. 
     'Of  course, he possessed the ring  for many years,  and used it,  so it 
might take a long while for the  influence to  wear off  - before it was safe 
for him to see it  again, for  instance.  Otherwise,  he might  live on  for  
years,  quite happily: just stop  as  he was when he parted with  it. For he 
gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I  was  not 
troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the  thing go. It is for  
you that I feel responsible. 
     'Ever  since  Bilbo left  I have been deeply concerned  about you,  and 
about all  these charming, absurd, helpless  hobbits. It would be a grievous 
blow to the world, if  the Dark Power overcame the Shire; if all  your kind, 
jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not 
to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.' 

####-     Frodo shuddered. 'But why  should we be?'  he asked. 'And why should he 
want such slaves?' 
     'To tell you the  truth,' replied Gandalf,  'I  believe that hitherto - 
hitherto,  mark you - he has entirely overlooked the existence  of   hobbits.  
You should be thankful. But your  safety has passed. He does not need you   - 
he  has  many  more useful  servants   -  but  he won't forget you again. And 
hobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than hobbits happy and 
free. There is  such a thing as malice and revenge.' 
     'Revenge?' said Frodo. 'Revenge for what? I still don't understand what 
all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring.' 
     'It has everything to do with  it,' said Gandalf. 'You do  not know the 
real peril  yet; but  you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I was last  
here; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for a moment.' 
     Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain 
that hung  from  his  belt. He unfastened  it  and handed  it slowly  to the 
wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in 
some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it. 
     Gandalf held it up. It looked  to be  made of pure and solid gold. 'Can 
you see any markings  on it?' he asked. 
     'No,'  said  Frodo. 'There  are none. It is quite  plain,  and it never  
shows a scratch or sign of wear.' 
     'Well  then, look!'  To Frodo's  astonishment and  distress  the wizard 
threw it suddenly  into the middle  of a glowing corner  of the fire.  Frodo 
gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him back. 
     'Wait!' he said in a commanding voice,  giving Frodo a quick  look from 
under his bristling brows. 
     No apparent  change came over the ring. After a  while  Gandalf got up, 
closed  the shutters outside the window,  and drew  the  curtains.  The room 
became dark and silent, though the  clack of Sam's shears, now nearer to the  
windows,  could  still be heard  faintly from the garden. For  a  moment the 
wizard st ood looking at the fire; then he stooped and  removed  the ring  to 
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped. 
     It  is quite cool,' said Gandalf. 'Take it!' Frodo received  it  on his 
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever. 
     'Hold it up!' said Gandalf. 'And look closely!' 
     As  Frodo  did  so,  he  now  saw  fine  lines, finer than  the  finest  
pen-strokes,  running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fire that 

####-seemed  to  form  the  letters of a flowing  script. They  shone  piercingly 
bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth. 
 
     I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Frodo in a quavering voice. 
     'No,' said Gandalf, 'but I can. The  letters are Elvish,  of an ancient 
mode, but the  language is that of Mordor, which I will  not utter here. But 
this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough: 
     One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, 
     One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them. 
     It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore: 
     Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky, 
     Seven for the Dwarf- lords in their halls of stone, 
     Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die, 
     One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne 
     In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. 
     One Ring to rule them all. One Ring to find them, 
     One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them 
     In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.' 
     He  paused,  and  then  said  slowly in  a  deep voice:  'This  is  the 
Master-ring, the One  Ring to rule them all.  This is the  One  Ring that he 
lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of  his power. He greatly desires 
it - but he must not get it.' 
     Frodo sat silent  and motionless.  Fear seemed  to stretch out  a  vast  
hand, like a dark  cloud rising in the East and  looming  up  to engulf him. 
'This ring!' he stammered. 'How, how on earth did it come to me?' 
     'Ah!' said Gandalf. 'That is a very long story. The beginnings lie back 
in  the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember. If  I were to 
tell  you all  that tale, we should still  be sitting  here when  Spring had 
passed into Winter. 
     'But last  night  I told  you of Sauron the Great,  the Dark  Lord. The 
rumours that you have  heard are  true: he  has indeed arisen again and left 
his hold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the  Dark Tower 
of Mordor. That name even  you  hobbits have heard of, like a  shadow on the 
borders of  old  stories. Always after a  defeat and a  respite, the  Shadow 
takes another shape and grows again.' 
     'I wish it need not have happened in my time,' said Frodo. 
     'So do I,' said Gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. But 

####-that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the 
time that  is given, us. And already, Frodo,  our  time is beginning to look  
black. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are  far from ripe,  
I think, but  they are ripening. We shall be hard put to  it.  We  should be 
very hard put to it, even if it were not for this dreadful chance. 
     'The Enemy  still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge to 
beat down all resistance,  break the last defences, and cover  all the lands 
in a second darkness. He lacks the One Ring. 
     'The  Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid  from him, and  his hand 
never touched  them or  sullied them. Seven the  Dwarf-kings possessed,  but 
three he  has recovered,  and the others the  dragons have consumed. Nine he 
gave  to  Mortal Men,  proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long ago  they 
fell under  the dominion  of the One, and they became  Ringwraiths,  shadows 
under  his  great Shadow, his most terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a  
year since the Nine walked abroad. Yet who  knows?  As the Shadow grows 
once 
more, they too may walk again. But  come!  We will not speak of such  things 
even in the morning of the Shire. 
     'So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Seven also,  or  
else  they are  destroyed.  The Three are hidden still.  But that no  longer  
troubles him. He only  needs the One; for he made  that Ring himself, it  is 
his, and he let a great part of his  own former power pass  into it, so that 
he could rule all the other s.  If he recovers it, then he  will command them 
all again, wherever they be,  even the Three, and  all that has been wrought 
with them will be laid bare, and he will be stronger than ever. 
     'And this  is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the  One had 
perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been  done. But he 
knows now that it has not perished, that it has been found. So he is seeking 
it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent  on it. It is his great hope and 
our great fear. ' 
     'Why,  why wasn't it destroyed?'  cried Frodo. 'And how  did  the Enemy  
ever come to lose it, if  he  was so strong, and it was so precious to him?' 
He  clutched  the Ring  in his hand,  as  if  he saw  already  dark  fingers 
stretching out to seize it. 
     'It  was taken from him,' said Gandalf.  'The  strength of the Elves to 
resist  him was greater long ago; and  not all Men were estranged from them. 
The  Men of Westernesse  came  to their aid. That  is a  chapter of  ancient 

####-history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and 
gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain. 
One day, perhaps, I will tell you all the tale, or you shall hear it told in 
full by one who knows it best. 
     'But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how  this thing 
came to  you, and that will be tale enough, this is all that  I will say. It 
was Gil-galad,  Elven-king and Elendil  of Westernesse who overthrew Sauron, 
though they themselves perished in the  deed; and Isildur Elendil's son  cut 
the  Ring  from  Sauron's hand and  took  it  for his own.  Then  Sauron was 
vanquished  and  his  spirit fled and was hidden for long  years,  until his 
shadow took shape again in Mirkwood. 
     'But  the  Ring was  lost. It fell  into  the Great  River, Anduin,  and 
vanished. For Isildur was marching north  along the east banks of the River,  
and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Orcs of the Mountains, and 
almost all his folk  were slain. He leaped  into the waters,  but  the  Ring 
slipped from his finger as he swam, and then the Orcs saw him and killed him 
with arrows.' 
     Gandalf paused. 'And there in the dark pools amid the  Gladden Fields,' 
he said, 'the Ring passed out  of knowledge and legend; and even so much  of 
its history is known now  only to a few, and the Council of the  Wise  could 
discover no more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think. 
     'Long  after, but  still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the 
Great River  on  the edge of  Wilderland  a  clever -handed  and quiet-footed 
little people. I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to the fathers of  the 
fathers  of the Stoors, for they loved  the  River, and often swam in it, or  
made  little  boats  of reeds. There was among them a family of high repute,  
for it was  large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother  
of  the  folk, stern  and  wise  in old lore,  such  as they  had. The  most 
inquisitive and  curious-minded of that  family was called  Smjagol. He  was 
interested in  roots and beginnings; he dived into  deep pools; he  burrowed 
under  trees and  growing plants; he tunnelled  into green  mounds;  and  he 
ceased to  look up at the hill -tops, or the leaves on trees, or  the flowers 
opening in the air: his head and his eyes were downward. 
     'He had a  friend  called Djagol, of similar sort, sharper -eyed but not 
so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down to the Gladden 
Fields, where  there were  great beds  of  iris  and  flowering reeds. There 
Smjagol got out and went nosing about the banks but Deal sat in the boat and 

####-fished. Suddenly a great fish took  his  hook, and before he  knew where  he 
was, he was dragged out and down into the water, to  the bottom. Then he let 
go of his line, for he thought he saw  something shining  in  the river -bed; 
and holding his breath he grabbed at it. 
     'Then up he came spluttering,  with weeds in his  hair and a handful of 
mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! when he washed the mud away, 
there 
in his  hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it  shone and glittered in the 
sun, so  that his heart  was glad.  But  Smjagol had  been watching him from 
behind  a tree, and as Deal  gloated  over the  ring, Smjagol came softly up 
behind. 
     '"Give  us  that,  Deal,  my  love,"  said Smjagol,  over  his friend's 
shoulder. 
     '"Why?" said Deal. 
     ' "Because it's my birthday, my love, and I wants it," said Smjagol. 
     '"I don't care," said Deal. "I have  given  you a present already, more 
than I could afford. I found this, and I'm going to keep it." 
     ' "Oh, are you  indeed, my  love," said  Smjagol; and he caught Deal by 
the  throat  and  strangled  him,  because  the gold  looked  so bright  and 
beautiful. Then he put the ring on his finger. 
     'No one  ever found out what had become  of  Deal;  he was murdered far  
from home, and  his body  was cunningly hidden. But  Smjagol returned alone; 
and he found that none of his  family could see him, when he was wearing the 
ring. He was  very  pleased with  his discovery  and he concealed it; and he 
used it  to  find  out secrets, and  he  put  his  knowledge to crooked  and 
malicious  uses.  He became  sharp-eyed and  keen-eared  for  all  that  was 
hurtful. The ring had given him power according to  his stature. It is not to 
be wondered at  that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when 
visible)  
by  all his  relations.  They kicked him, and he  bit their feet. He took to 
thieving, and going about muttering to himself,  and gurgling in his throat. 
So they called him Gollum, and cursed him, and told him to go far  away; and 
his grandmother, desiring peace, expelled him from the family and turned him 
out of her hole. 
     'He wandered in  loneliness, weeping a little for the  hardness  of the 
world, and he journeyed up the River, till  he came to a stream that  flowed 
down from the mountains, and he went that way.  He caught fish in deep pools 

####-with invisible fingers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as  he 
was  bending over a  pool, he felt a burning  on the back of his head) and a  
dazzling light from the water pained his wet eyes. He wondered at it, for he 
had almost forgotten about  the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and 
shook his fist at her. 
     'But  as  he  lowered his eyes, he saw far above  the tops of the Misty 
Mountains, out of which the stream came.  And he thought suddenly: "It would 
be cool and shady under  those mountains. The Sun could not  watch me there. 
The  roots  of those mountains  must be  roots indeed; there  must be  great 
secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning." 
     'So he journeyed by night up into  the highlands, and he found a little 
cave  out of which the dark stream ran; and  he wormed his way like a maggot 
into the heart of the  hills, and vanished  out  of all  knowledge. The Ring 
went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had 
begun 
to grow again, could learn nothing of it.' 
     'Gollum!' cried  Frodo. 'Gollum? Do  you mean  that this  is  the  very 
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!' 
     'I  think  it  is  a sad  story,' said the  wizard, 'and it might  have 
happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.' 
     'I  can't  believe  that  Gollum  was  connected with  hobbits, however 
distantly,' said Frodo with some heat. 'What an abominable notion!' 
     'It is  true all  the same,' replied Gandalf. 'About their  origins, at 
any  rate, I know  more than hobbits  do themselves. And even  Bilbo's story 
suggests the kinship. There  was  a  great  deal in the background  of their 
minds  and memories  that was  very  similar.  They  understood one  another 
remarkably well,  very much  better  than a hobbit would  understand, say, a  
Dwarf, or an Orc, or even  an Elf. Think of the riddles they both  knew, for  
one thing.' 
     'Yes,' said Frodo. 'Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and 
of  much the same sort. And hobbits don't cheat.  Gollum  meant to cheat all  
the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo  off his  guard. And I daresay 
it amused his wickedness  to  start a game which might end  in providing him 
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.' 
     'Only too true, I fear,' said Gandalf. 'But there was something else in 
it, I think, which you don't see yet. Even Gollum was not wholly  ruined. He 
had proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed  -as a hobbit 

####-might. There  was a little  corner of  his mind that was still  his own, and 
light  came  through it, as  through  a  chink in the dark: light out of the 
past.  It was actually  pleasant,  I think,  to  hear  a kindly voice again, 
bringing up memories  of wind,  and trees, and sun  on the  grass, and  such 
forgotten things.  
     'But that, of  course, would only make the evil  part of him angrier in 
the end - unless it could  be conquered.  Unless it could be cured.' Gandalf 
sighed. 'Alas! there is little hope of  that for him. Yet  not  no hope. No, 
not  though  he  possessed  the Ring so  long, almost  as far back as he can 
remember. For it was long since he  had worn it much:  in the black darkness 
it was seldom needed. Certainly he had never "faded".  He is  thin and tough 
still. But the  thing was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had 
become almost unbearable. 
     'All the "great secrets" under the mountains had turned  out to be just  
empty night: there was  nothing more to find out,  nothing worth doing, only 
nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering.  He was altogether wretched. 
He hated the  dark,  and  he hated light more: he hated  everything, and the 
Ring most of all.' 
     'What  do you mean?' said Frodo. 'Surely the Ring was his  precious and 
the only thing he cared for?  But if he  hated it,  why didn't he get rid of 
it, or go away and leave it?' 
     'You  ought to  begin to understand, Frodo,  after all you have heard,' 
said Gandalf. 'He  hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved  himself. He 
could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter. 
     'A  Ring  of  Power  looks   after  itself,  Frodo.  It  may  slip  off 
treacherously, but its keeper never  abandons it. At most he  plays with the 
idea of handing  it on  to someone else's care  - and  that  only at an early 
stage, when it first  begins  to grip. But  as  far as I know Bilbo alone in 
history has ever gone beyond playing, and  really done it.  He needed all my 
help, too. And even  so he would never  have just  forsaken  it, or  cast it 
aside. It  was not Gollum, Frodo, but the  Ring  itself that decided things.  
The Ring left him.' 
     'What, just in time  to meet Bilbo?' said Frodo. 'Wouldn't an  Orc have 
suited it better?' 
     'It  is no laughing  matter,'  said Gandalf. 'Not for you.  It was  the 
strangest event in the  whole history of the  Ring so far:  Bilbo's  arrival 
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark. 

####-     'There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The  Ring was  trying to 
get back to its master. It had slipped from Isildur's hand and betrayed him; 
then when a  chance came it caught poor Deal, and he was murdered; and after  
that Gollum,  and it had devoured him. It could make  no further use of him:  
he was too  small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never  
leave his deep pool again. So  now, when its master was awake  once more and 
sending out his dark  thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. Only to 
be 
picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo from the Shire!  
     'Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the 
Ring-maker.  I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was meant  to 
find the Ring, and not by its maker.  In which  case you  also were meant to 
have it. And that maybe an encouraging thought.' 
     It  is  not,' said Frodo. "Though I am not sure  that I understand you. 
But how have you  learned all this about the Ring, and about  Gollum? Do you  
really know it all, or are you just guessing still?' 
     Gandalf looked  at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much  and I have 
learned much,' he answered. 'But I am not  going to give an account of all my 
doings to you. The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is  known  
to all the  Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire-writing 
alone, apart from any  other evidence.' 'And  when  did you discover  that?' 
asked Frodo, interrupting. 'Just  now in this room, of course,' answered the 
wizard sharply.  'But  I expected to  find  it.  I have come back  from dark 
journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the last proof,  and 
all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the 
gap in the history, required some  thought. I may have  started with guesses 
about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.' 
     'You have seen Gollum?' exclaimed Frodo in amazement. 
     'Yes. The obvious thing to do, of  course, if  one  could. I tried long 
ago; but I have managed it at last.' 
     'Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know that?' 
     'Not so  clearly.  What I  have told you is what Gollum was  willing to 
tell - though not, of course, in the  way  I have  reported it. Gollum  is a  
liar,  and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the  Ring his 
"birthday  present",  and he  stuck  to  that.  He  said it  came  from  his 
grandmother, who  had lots  of beautiful  things of  that kind. A ridiculous 
story. I have no doubt  that Smjagol's grandmother was a matriarch,  a great 

####-person in her  way,  but to talk of  her  possessing  many  Elven-rings  was 
absurd, and as for giving them away, it was a lie. But a lie with a grain of 
truth. 
     'The  murder  of  Deal haunted  Gollum,  and he had made  up a defence, 
repeating  it  to his "precious" over and  over again, as he gnawed bones in 
the dark, until he almost  believed it. It  was   his birthday. Deal ought to 
have given the ring to him. It had  previously turned up  just so as to be a  
present. It was his birthday present, and so on, and on. 
     I  endured  him  as long  as  I could,  but  the truth  was desperately 
important, and in the end I  had to be harsh. I put the fear of fire on him, 
and wrung  the  true  story  out of  him, bit by  bit,  together  with  much 
snivelling  and snarling. He thought  he was misunderstood and ill-used. But 
when  he  had  at  last  told  me his history,  as  far  as  the end of  the 
Riddle-game  and Bilbo's escape, he would not say any more,  except in  dark 
hints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. He muttered that he was 
going  to gel his own back. People would see if he would stand being kicked, 
and driven  into  a hole and  then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good 
friends and very strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay for it. That 
was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed his name. What  is more, he 
knew where he came from.' 
     'But how did he find that out?' asked Frodo. 
     'Well, as for the  name, Bilbo very foolishly told  Gollum himself; and 
after that  it  would  not be difficult to discover his country, once Gollum 
came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring proved stronger than 
his fear of the Orcs, or even of the light. After a year  or two he left the 
mountains. You  see, though  still  bound  by desire of it, the Ring was  no 
longer devouring him; he began  to revive a little.  He  felt  old , terribly 
old, yet less timid, and he was mortally hungry. 
     'Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, and he always 
will, I think; but he was cunning. He found he could hide  from daylight and 
moonshine,  and make his way swiftly  and softly by dead of night  with  his 
pale cold  eyes,  and  catch  small  frightened or  unwary  things. He  grew 
stronger  and  bolder  with new food  and  new air. He  found  his way  into 
Mirkwood, as one would expect.' 
     'Is that where you found him?' asked Frodo. 
     'I  saw  him there,' answered Gandalf, 'but before that he had wandered 
far, following  Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to  learn anything  from him 

####-for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted  by curses and threats.  
"What had it  got in its pocketses?" he said. "It wouldn't say, no precious. 
Little cheat. Not a fair  question. It  cheated first, it did. It  broke the 
rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we will, precious!" 
     'That is a sample of his talk. I don't suppose you want any more. I had 
weary days  of it. But from hints dropped among  the snarls I  even gathered 
that his padding feet had  taken him  at last to Esgaroth, and even  to  the 
streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great 
events went far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo's name  and 
knew where he came from.  We had made no secret of our return journey to his 
home in the West. Gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.' 
     'Then why didn't  he track Bilbo further?' asked Frodo. 'Why didn't  he 
come to the Shire?' 
     'Ah,' said Gandalf, 'now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He set 
out and  came  back westward, as far as the Great River. But  then he turned 
aside. He  was not daunted by  the distance, I am  sure.  No, something else 
drew him away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me. 
     'The Wood-elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, for his trail 
was  still fresh  then. Through Mirkwood and back again it  led them, though 
they never  caught him. The wood was full of  the  rumour  of  him, dreadful 
tales even among beasts and birds. The  Woodmen said that there was some 
new 
terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees to  find nests; it 
crept into  holes  to  find  the young; it slipped  through windows  to find 
cradles. 
     'But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It wandered 
off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves' ken, and was lost. And then 
I made a great mistake. Yes,  Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may 
prove the  worst. I let the matter be. I let  him go; for I had much else to 
think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman. 
     'Well, that was  years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark and 
dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again, after Bilbo 
left here. And my search would  have been in vain,  but for the  help that I 
had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this  age 
of  the world.  Together we  sought  for  Gollum down  the  whole length  of 
Wilderland, without hope, and without success. But at last, when I had given 
up the chase and turned to other parts, Gollum was found. My friend returned 

####-out of the great perils bringing the miserable creature with him. 
     'What he had  been doing  he would not say. He only wept and  called us 
cruel,  with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed him he  whined 
and  cringed, and  rubbed his  long hands, licking his  fingers  as if  they 
pained  him, as if he remembered some old torture.  But I am afraid there is 
no possible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by step, mile by 
mile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.' 
     A heavy silence fell in the room.  Frodo could hear his  heart beating. 
Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam's  shears could now be 
heard. 
     'Yes,  to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Alas! Mordor draws all wicked things,  
and the Dark Power was bending all its will to  gather them there.  The Ring 
of the Enemy would leave  its  mark, too, leave him open to the summons. And 
all folk were whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its hatred  
of  the  West.  There were his fine  new  friends, who would help him in his 
revenge!  
     'Wretched  fool!  In that land he  would  learn  much, too much for his 
comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and pried on  the borders he would  
be caught, and taken - for examination. That was the way of it, I fear. When 
he was found he  had already been  there long,  and was on his  way back. On 
some errand  of  mischief. But  that  does  not matter  much now. His  worst  
mischief was done. 
     'Yes, alas! through  him the  Enemy has learned that the One  has  been 
found again. He  knows where Isildur fell. He knows  where  Gollum found his 
ring. He knows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that 
it is not one of the  Three, for they have  never been lost, and they endure 
no evil. He knows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine, for they are 
accounted for.  He  knows that it is  the One.  And he has  at last heard, I 
think, of hobbits and the Shire. 
     'The Shire - he may be seeking for  it now, if he has not already found 
out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that  he may  even think  that  the 
long-unnoticed name of Baggins has become important.' 
     'But this is  terrible!' cried Frodo. 'Far  worse than the worst that I 
imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I 
to do? For now I am really afraid. What  am  I to do? What a pity that Bilbo  
did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!' 
     'Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike 

####-without need. And  he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so 
little hurt from the evil,  and escaped  in  the  end, because he began  his 
ownership of the Ring so. With Pity.' 
     'I am sorry,' said  Frodo.  'But I am frightened; and I do not feel any 
pity for Gollum.' 
     'You have not seen him,' Gandalf broke in. 
     'No,  and I don't  want to,' said Frodo. I can't understand you. Do you  
mean to  say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on  after all  those 
horrible  deeds? Now at any rate he is  as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy. 
He deserves death.' 
     'Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some 
that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager  to 
deal out death in judgement.  For  even the very wise cannot see all ends. I 
have not much hope  that Gollum can be cured before  he dies, but there is a  
chance of it. And  he is bound  up with the fate of the Ring. My heart tells 
me that  he  has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and 
when that comes, the pity  of Bilbo may  rule the fate  of many -  yours not 
least. In any case we did  not kill him:  he is very old  and very wretched. 
The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with such  kindness as 
they can find in their wise hearts.' 
     'All the same,' said Frodo,  'even if  Bilbo could  not kill  Gollum, I 
wish he had not kept the  Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had 
not got it!  Why  did  you  let me keep it? Why didn't you make me  throw it  
away, or, or destroy it?' 
     'Let you? Make you?' sa id the  wizard.  'Haven't you been  listening to 
all  that I  have said? You are not thinking of what you are saying.  But as 
for throwing  it away,  that was  obviously wrong. These Rings have a way of 
being  found. In evil hands it might have done great evil. Worst  of all, it 
might have fallen into the  hands of the Enemy. Indeed  it certainly  would; 
for this is the One, and  he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it 
to himself. 
     'Of  course, my  dear  Frodo,  it  was dangerous  for you; and that has 
troubled me deeply. But there  was so  much at stake that I had to take some 
risk  - though even when  I was far away there has never been a day when the 
Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I  
did not think  that the Ring would have  any lasting effect on  you, not for 
evil,  not at any rate for a very long time. And you must remember that nine 

####-years ago, when I last saw you, I still knew little for certain.' 
     'But  why  not destroy  it, as you say should have been done long ago?' 
cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or even  sent me a message, I would 
have done away with it.' 
     'Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?' 
     'No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.' 
     'Try!' said Gandalf. Try now!' 
     Frodo drew the Ring  out of his pocket again and looked  at it. It  now 
appeared  plain and smooth, without  mark or device that  he  could see. The 
gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was 
its  colour,  how perfect was  its  roundness. It was an admirable thing and 
altogether  precious. When he  took  it out he had intended to fling it from 
him into the very hottest  part of the  fire. But he found now that he could 
not do so, not without a great  struggle. He weighed the  Ring in his  hand, 
hesitating,  and forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told  him; 
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast  it away - 
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket. 
     Gandalf laughed grimly. 'You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily 
let  it  go,  nor will to damage it. And I  could not "make" you - except by 
force, which would break your mind. But as for breaking  the Ring, force  is 
useless. Even if you  took it and struck it  with a  heavy sledge -hammer,  it 
would make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine. 
     'Your small  fire, of course, would  not melt even ordinary  gold. This 
Ring has already passed through it unscathed,  and even unheated.  But there 
is  no smith's forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not even the 
anvils and furnaces  of  the Dwarves could do that.  It has been  said  that 
dragon-fire could melt and consume the Rings  of Power, but there is not now 
any dragon left on earth in which the old fire is hot enough; nor was  there 
ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the 
One 
Ring,  the Ruling Ring, for  that was  made by Sauron himself. There is only 
one  way:  to  find  the  Cracks  of Doom in  the  depths  of Orodruin,  the 
Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it, 
to put it beyond the grasp of the Enemy for ever.' 
     'I do  really wish to destroy it!'  cried Frodo. 'Or,  well, to have it 
destroyed. I am not  made for perilous  quests. I wish  I had never seen the 
Ring! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?' 

####-     'Such questions cannot be  answered,'  said Gandalf.  'You may be  sure 
that it was not  for any merit that others do not possess: not for  power or  
wisdom,  at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you  must therefore  use 
such strength and heart and wits as you have.' 
     'But I  have so  little of any  of  these  things!  You  are  wise  and 
powerful. Will you not take the Ring?' 
     'No!' cried Gandalf, springing  to  his feet. 'With that power I should 
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring  would  gain a power  
still greater and more deadly.' His eyes flashed and his face  was lit as by 
a fire within.  'Do not tempt me! For I do not  wish to become like the  Dark 
Lord  himself. Yet the  way of the  Ring  to  my heart is by pity, pity  for  
weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do  not tempt me! I dare not  
take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. The wish to wield it would be too 
great, for my  strength.  I shall  have  such  need of it. Great  perils lie 
before me.' 
     He  went to the  window and drew aside the curtains  and the  shutters.  
Sunlight  streamed  back again into  the  room. Sam   passed  along the  path  
outside whistling. 'And now,'  said  the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the 
decision lies with you. But  I will always  help you.' He  laid his hand  on 
Frodo's shoulder. 'I will help you bear this  burden, as long as It is yours 
to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving.' 
     There was a long  silence.  Gandalf  sat down again and puffed  at  his 
pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes  seemed closed, but under the  lids he 
was watching Frodo  intently. Frodo  gazed fixedly at the red embers on  the 
hearth,  until they filled all his vision,  and he seemed to be looking down 
into  profound  wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled  Cracks of Doom 
and the terror of the Fiery Mountain. 
     'Well!'  said Gandalf at last.  'What are you  thinking about? Have you  
decided what to do?' 
     'No!'  answered Frodo,  coming back to himself  out  of  darkness,  and 
finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the  window he 
could see the sunlit garden.   'Or perhaps, yes.  As far as I understand what 
you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the 
present, whatever it may do to me.' 
     'Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with 
that purpose,' said  Gandalf.  
     'I hope so,'  said Frodo.  'But I  hope  that  you may  find some other  

####-better  keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it  seems that I  am  a  danger, a  
danger  to all that live near  me.  I cannot  keep the Ring and stay here. I 
ought to leave   Bag End,  leave the Shire, leave everything and go away.' He 
sighed. 
     'I should like to  save  the Shire, if I could  - though there have been 
times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words, and have 
felt that an earthquake or  an invasion of dragons might  be good  for them. 
But  I don't feel  like that  now. I feel  that  as  long as the Shire  lies 
behind, safe and comfortable, I shall find  wandering more bearable: I shall 
know that somewhere there is a firm  foothold, even if my feet  cannot stand 
there again. 
     'Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that 
as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo's  or better, ending 
in  peace. But this  would  mean exile,  a  flight from danger into  danger, 
drawing  it after me. And I suppose I  must go alone, if I am to do that and 
save  the Shire.  But I  feel very  small, and  very  uprooted,  and  well - 
desperate. The Enemy is so strong and terrible.' 
     He did  not tell  Gandalf, but as  he  was speaking a  great desire  to 
follow  Bilbo flamed up in his heart  - to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps  to 
find him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he  could almost  
have run out there and then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo ha d done 
on a similar morning long ago. 
     'My  dear  Frodo!'  exclaimed  Gandalf.  'Hobbits  really  are  amazing 
creatures, as I have said before. You  can learn all that there  is  to know 
about their  ways in a month, and yet after  a hundred  years they can still 
surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get  such  an answer, not even 
from  you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though  he little 
thought how important it  would prove. I am afraid  you are  right. The Ring 
will not be able to stay hidden in the  Shire much longer; and for  your own 
sake, as  well  as  for others, you  will have to go, and leave the  name of 
Baggins behind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or  
in the Wild. I will give  you a travelling name now. When you go, go as  Mr. 
Underhill. 
     'But I don't think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone you can 
trust, and who would be willing  to go by your side  -  and that you would be 
willing to take  into unknown perils.  But  if you look for a  companion, be 
careful in choosing! And be  careful of what  you say,  even to your closest  

####-friends! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.' 
     Suddenly he  stopped as if  listening.  Frodo became aware that all was 
very quiet,  inside and  outside. Gandalf  crept to one side of  the window.  
Then with  a  dart he  sprang to  the sill,  and thrust a  long arm out  and 
downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head 
hauled by 
one ear. 
     'Well, well, bless my beard!' said Gandalf. 'Sam Gamgee is it? Now what 
may you be doing?' 
     'Lor bless  you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!' said Sam. 'Nothing! Leastways I was 
just  trimming the grass-border  under  the window,  if you  follow me.'  He 
picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence. 
     'I don't,' said Gandalf grimly. It is some time  since I last heard the 
sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?' 
     'Eavesdropping,  sir? I don't  follow you, begging  your pardon.  There 
ain't no eaves at Bag End, and that's a fact.' 
     'Don't be  a  fool! What  have  you  heard,  and why  did you  listen?' 
Gandalf's eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.  
     'Mr. Frodo, sir!' cried Sam quaking. 'Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don't  
let  him turn  me  into anything unnatural!  My old  dad would take on so. I 
meant no harm, on my honour, sir!' 
     'He  won't hurt you,' said Frodo,  hardly able to keep  from  laughing, 
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. 'He knows, as well as I  
do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straight 
away!' 
     'Well, sir,' said Sam dithering a little. 'I heard a deal that I didn't 
rightly  understand,  about an  enemy, and  rings, and  Mr. Bilbo, sir,  and 
dragons, and a  fiery mountain, and - and  Elves, sir. I listened because  I 
couldn't help  myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless  me, sir, but I do 
love tales of  that sort. And  I believe  them  too,  whatever Ted may  say. 
Elves,  sir! I  would dearly love  to see  them. Cou ldn't you take  me to see 
Elves, sir, when you go?' 
     Suddenly Gandalf laughed. 'Come  inside!' he shouted,  and  putting out 
both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all, 
right through the window and stood him on the floor. 'Take you to see Elves, 
eh?' he  said, eyeing Sam  closely, but with a smile flickering on his face. 
'So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?' 

####-     'I  did,  sir.  And that's why I choked:  which  you heard seemingly. I 
tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.' 
     'It can't be  helped, Sam,' said  Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized 
that  flying  from the Shire  would mean  more painful partings than  merely 
saying farewell  to  the familiar comforts of Bag End. 'I shall have to  go. 
But' - and  here he looked  hard at Sam  - 'if you really care about me, you  
will keep that dead secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of 
what you've heard here, then  I  hope  Gandalf will turn you into a  spotted 
toad and fill the garden full of grass-snakes.' 
     Sam fell on his knees,  trembling. 'Get  up, Sam!' said Gandalf. I have 
thought of something better than  that. Something  to shut your  mouth,  and  
punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!' 
     'Me,  sir!' cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk.  'Me 
go and see Elves and all! Hooray!' he shouted, and then burst into tears.  
 

####- 

Chapter 3. Three is Company 

 
 
     'You ought to go quietly, and you ought to  go soon,' said Gandalf. Two 
or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made  no sign of getting ready to 
go. 
     'I know. But it is difficult to do both,' he objected. If I just vanish 
like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.' 
     'Of course you mustn't vanish!' said Gandalf. 'That wouldn't do at all! 
I said soon, not instantly. If  you can think of any way of slipping out  of 
the  Shire  without  its  being generally known, it will  be  worth a little 
delay. But you must not delay too long.' 
     'What  about the  autumn, on  or after  Our Birthday?' asked  Frodo. 'I  
think I could probably make some arrangements by then.' 
     To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had come 
to  the  point. Bag End seemed a more  desirable residence than  i t  had for 
years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the 
Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think 
more kindly  of journeying, as it always did at that season. He  had  indeed 
privately made up his mind to leave on his  fiftieth birthday:  Bilbo's  one 
hundred and twenty-eighth. It  seemed somehow the proper day on which to set 
out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and  the  one 
thing  that made the thought  of leaving  bearable. He  thought as little as 
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in  the end. But he did 
not tell all his  thoughts to Gandalf. What the  wizard  guessed  was always 
difficult to tell. 
     He looked at Frodo and smiled. 'Very well,' he said. 'I think that will 
do -  but  it must not  be any  later. I  am getting  very anxious.  In  the 
mean-while, do take care, and don't let out any hint of where you are going!  
And  see  that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him 
into a toad.' 
     'As for  where I am going,' said Frodo, 'it would be  difficult to give 
that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.' 
     'Don't be absurd!' said Gandalf. 'I  am not warning you against leaving 
an  address  at the post -office!  But you are leaving the  Shire   - and that 
should not be known,  until you  are far away. And  you must go, or at least 

####-set  out,  either North,  South,  West  or East  -  and  the direction should 
certainly not be known.' 
     'I have been so  taken up with the thoughts of leaving  Bag End, and of 
saying  farewell, that I have  never even  considered  the  direction,' said 
Frodo. 'For where am I to go? And by  what  shall I  steer? What is to be my  
quest? Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back aga in; but I go to lose 
one, and not return, as far as I can see.' 
     'But you cannot  see very far,' said Gandalf. 'Neither can I. It may be 
your task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I do 
not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long road yet.' 
     'No  indeed!' said  Frodo.  'But  in the  meantime what course am I  to 
lake?' 
     'Towards  danger; but not  too  rashly, nor too straight,' answered the 
wizard. 'If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey  should not 
prove too  perilous, though the  Road is less easy than it was, and it  will 
grow worse as the year fails.' 
     'Rivendell!' said  Frodo. 'Very good:  I will go east, and  I will make 
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.' He 
spoke lightly;  but his heart was  moved  suddenly with  a desire to see the 
house of Elrond  Halfelven, and  breathe the  air  of that deep valley where 
many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace. 
     One summer's evening an astonishing piece of news  reached the Ivy Bush 
and Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were 
forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was  selling Bag End, indeed 
he had already sold it - to the Sackville-Bagginses!  
     'For a nice bit, loo,' said some.  'At a bargain price,'  said  others,  
'and that's more likely when Mistress Lobelia's  the  buyer.' (Otho had died 
some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.) 
     Just  why  Mr.  Frodo  was selling  his  beautiful hole was  even  more 
debatable than the price. A  few held the theory - supported by the nods and  
hints  of Mr. Baggins himself  - that Frodo's money was  running out: he  was 
going to leave Hobbiton and live in a  quiet way on the proceeds of the sale 
down  in  Buckland  among   his  Brandybuck  relations.  'As  far  from  the 
Sackville-Bagginses  as may be,'  some added.  But  so firmly fixed  had the 
notion of  the immeasurable wealth  of the Bagginses of Bag End  become that 
most found this  hard to believe, harder than  any  other reason or unreason 
that  their fancy  could suggest:  to  most  it suggested  a  dark  and  yet 

####-unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go 
about by day, it was well known that he was 'hiding up in the  Bag End'. But 
however a removal might  fit in with the  designs of his wizardry, there was 
no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland. 
     'Yes, I shall be moving  this autumn,' he  said.  'Merry Brandybuck  is 
looking out  for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.' 
     As a matter of fact with  Merry's help he had already chosen and bought 
a little house  at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all  but 
Sam he pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision 
to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on  the 
eastern borders  of  the Shire, and as he had lived there  in childhood  his 
going back would at least seem credible. 
     Gandalf  stayed in the Shire for over two months.  Then one evening, at 
the end of  June, soon  after Frodo's  plan  had  been finally  arranged, he 
suddenly  announced that  he was going off  again next morning.  'Only for a 
short  while, I hope,'  he said.  'But  I am  going down beyond the southern 
borders to get some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should.' 
     He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried. 
'Has anything happened?' he asked. 
     'Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needs 
looking into. If I think it necessary after all  for you to get off at once, 
I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick  
to your plan; but be more careful than ever, especially of the  Ring.  Let me 
impress on you once more: don't use it!'  
     He  went off at dawn.  'I may be back any day,'  he  said. 'At the very 
latest I shall come back  for  the farewell party. I think after all you may 
need my company on the Road.' 
     At first  Frodo  was a  good deal  disturbed,  and wondered often  what 
Gandalf could  have  heard; but his  uneasiness wore  off, and in  the  fine  
weather  he forgot his  troubles for a  while. The  Shire had seldom seen so 
fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey 
was dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full. 
     Autumn was well under  way  before  Frodo began to worry  about Gandalf 
again.  September  was  passing  and there  was  still no  news of him.  The 
Birthday, and the removal, drew  nearer, and still he did not come,  or send 
word.  Bag End began to be busy.  Some of Frodo's friends  came  to stay and 
help  him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco  Boffin, and 

####-of course his special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between 
them 
they turned the whole place upside-down. 
     On  September  20th  two  covered  carts  went off  laden  to Buckland, 
conveying  the furniture and goods that Frodo had not  sold to his new home, 
by way of the  Brandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became  really anxious, 
and kept  a constant look -out  for  Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning,  
dawned as fair and  clear  as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still 
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was 
quite small, just  a  dinner  for himself  and his four helpers; but  he was 
troubled and fell in no mood for it. The thought  that he would so soon have 
to part  with his young  friends weighed  on his heart. He  wondered how  he 
would break it to them. 
     The four younger  hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the party 
soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf's absence. The dining-room was 
bare except for a table  and  chairs,  but the food  was good, and there was 
good  wine:  Frodo's  wine  had  not  been  included  in  the  sale  to  the 
Sackville-Bagginses. 
     'Whatever happens to  the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s  get  their 
claws on  it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!' said Frodo, as 
he drained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards.  
     When they had sung many songs, and talked of  many things they had done 
together,  they toasted  Bilbo's birthday, and  they  drank his  health  and 
Frodo's together according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff 
of air, and glimpse of the stars, and then  they went to bed.  Frodo's party 
was over, and Gandalf had not come. 
     The next morning they were busy packing another cart with the remainder 
of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off with Fatty (that is 
Fredegar  Bolger).  'Someone must get there and  warm the house  before  you  
arrive,' said Merry.  'Well, see you later - the day  after tomorrow,  if you  
don't go to sleep on the way!' 
     Folco went  home  aft er lunch,  but Pippin remained behind.  Frodo  was 
restless and anxious,  listening in vain for a  sound of Gandalf. He decided 
to  wait until  nightfall. After that,  if  Gandalf wanted him urgently,  he 
would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going 
on foot. His plan - for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as any 
other reason  -  was to walk from Hobbiton to  Bucklebury  Ferry, taking  it 

####-fairly easy. 
     'I shall  get  myself a bit  into  training,  too,' he said, looking at 
himself  in  a dusty mirror in the  half-empty  hall.  He  had  not done any 
strenuous walking for a long time, and the reflection  looked rather flabby, 
he thought. 
     After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired son, 
Lotho, turned  up, much to Frodo's annoyance. 'Ours at last!' said  Lobelia, 
as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of 
Bag  End  did not take effect  until  midnight.  But Lobelia  can perhaps be 
forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years  longer for  
Bag End  than she once hoped, and she was now  a  hundred years old. 
Anyway, 
she had  come to see that nothing she had paid for had been carried off; and 
she wanted the keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought 
a complete inventory  with her and went  right through  it. In  the end  she 
departed with Lotho and  the spare  key and  the promise that the  other key 
would  be  left at  the  Gamgees' in Bagshot Row.  She  snorted, and  showed 
plainly that she  thought the Gamgees  capable of plundering the hole during  
the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea. 
     He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee  in the  kitchen. It had 
been  officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland  'to  do for  Mr. 
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by 
the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia  
as a neighbour. 
     'Our  last meal at  Bag End!'  said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They 
left the washing up  for Lobelia.  Pippin  and Sam  strapped  up their three 
packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last  stroll in the 
garden. Sam disappeared. 
     The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled. 
Frodo 
wandered round the familiar rooms,  and saw the light  of the sunset fade on 
the walls,  and  shadows  creep out  of  the  corners.  It  grew slowly dark 
indoors. He went out and walked down to  the gate at the bottom of the path,  
and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half expected to  see Gandalf 
come striding up through the dusk. 
     The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. 'It's going  to be 
a fine night,'  he  said  aloud.  'That's good for a beginning.  I feel like 

####-walking. I  can't  bear any  more  hanging about. I am going  to start,  and 
Gandalf must follow  me.'  He  turned to go back, and  then  slopped, for he 
heard voices, just round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was 
certainly the old Gaffer's;  the other was strange, and  somehow  unpleasant. 
He could not make out what it said, but he heard the Gaffer's answers, which 
were rather shrill. The old man seemed put out. 
     'No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam went 
with 
him: anyway all  his stuff went.  Yes, sold out and  gone,  I tell'ee.  Why?  
Why's none of my business, or yours.  Where to?  That ain't no  secret. He's 
moved to Bucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is  - a tidy 
way.  I've never been so far myself; they're  queer folks in Buckland. No, I 
can't give no message. Good night to you!' 
     Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why  the fact 
that they did not  come on up the Hill seemed a  great relief. 'I am sick of 
questions a nd curiosity  about my doings,  I  suppose,' he thought. 'What an 
inquisitive lot they all  are!' He had half a mind to go and ask  the Gaffer  
who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned and 
walked quickly back to Bag End. 
     Pippin was sitting on his pack  in  the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo 
stepped inside the dark door. 'Sam!' he called. 'Sam! Time!' 
     'Coming, sir!' came  the answer  from far within, followed soon by  Sam 
himself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying farewell to the beer -barrel in 
the cellar. 
     'All aboard, Sam?' said Frodo. 
     'Yes, sir. I'll last for a bit now, sir.' 
     Frodo shut and locked the  round door, and  gave the key  to Sam.  'Run 
down with this to your home, Sam!' he said. 'Then cu t along the Row and meet 
us as quick as you can at the gate in the  lane  beyond the meadows.  We are 
not  going  through  the village  tonight.  Too  many ears pricking and eyes 
prying.' Sam ran off at full speed. 
     'Well, now we're off at last!'  said  Frodo. They shouldered their packs 
and took up their sticks, and  walked round the corner to the  west  side of 
Bag End. 'Good-bye!' said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He 
waved 
his hand, and then turned and (following Bilbo, if  he had known it) hurried 
after Peregrin down  the garden-path. They jumped over the low place in  the 

####-hedge at the bottom and took to the fields, passing into the darkness like a  
rustle in the grasses.  
     At the bottom of the  Hill  on its western  side they came  to  the gate 
opening on to a  narrow lane.  There they  halted and adjusted the straps of 
their packs. Presently  Sam  appeared, trotting quickly and  breathing hard; 
his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head 
a tall shapeless fell  bag, which  he called  a hat. In the gloom  he looked 
very much like a dwarf. 
     'I am sure you  have given me all the heaviest stuff,'  said Frodo.  'I  
pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.' 
     'I could take a lot  more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,' said Sam 
stoutly and untruthfully. 
     'No, you  don't,  Sam!' said  Pippin.  'It is  good  for him. He's  got 
nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He's been slack lately, and he'll 
feel the weight less when he's walked off some of his own.' 
     'Be kind to a poor old hobbit!' laughed Frodo. 'I shall be as thin as a  
willow-wand, I'm sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense. 
I suspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into  it 
at our next  packing.'  He  picked  up his  stick  again. 'Well, we all like 
walking  in the dark,' he said,  'so let's put  some miles  behind us before 
bed.' 
     For a short way they followed  the lane westwards. Then leaving it they 
turned left and took quietly to  the  fields again. They went in single file 
along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night fell dark about them. 
In their  dark cloaks they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings. 
Since they were  all hobbits, and were  trying  to be silent,  they made  no 
noise that even hobbits would  hear. Even the wild things in  the fields and 
woods hardly noticed their passing. 
     After  some  time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a narrow 
plank -bridge.  The stream  was  there no more than  a winding  black ribbon,  
bordered with leaning  alder -trees. A mile or two further south they hastily 
crossed the great  road  from  the Brandywine Bridge; they were  now in  the 
Tookland and  bending south-eastwards they made for the  Green Hill Country. 
As they began to climb its first slopes they looked back and  saw the  lamps  
in Hobbiton far off twinkling in  the gentle  valley of  the  Water. Soon it 
disappeared  in the  folds of the darkened land, and was followed by Bywater 
beside  its grey pool. When the  light of  the  last  farm was  far  behind, 

####-peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell. 
     'I wonder if  I shall ever  look down into that valley  again,' he said 
quietly. 
     When they  had walked for about three hours they rested. The night  was 
clear,  cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps of mist were creeping up  the 
hill-sides from the streams and deep  meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in 
a light wind  above their heads, made a black net aga inst the pale sky. They 
ate a  very  frugal supper (for hobbits), and  then went on again. Soon they 
struck a narrow road, that  went rolling  up and down,  fading grey into the 
darkness ahead: the road to Woodhall, and  Stock, and the Bucklebury  Ferry. 
It climbed away from the  main road  in the Water-valley, and wound over the 
skirts  of  the  Green  Hills  towards  Woody-End,  a  wild  corner  of  the 
Eastfarthing. 
     After a while  they plunged into  a deeply  cloven  track  between tall 
trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At first  
they  talked,  or hummed a  tune  softly together, being  now far  away from 
inquisitive ears. Then they marched  on in silence,  and Pippin began to lag 
behind.  At  last, as  they began to   climb  a  steep slope, he  stopped and 
yawned. 
     'I  am  so sleepy,' he said,  'that soon I shall fall down on the road. 
Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.' 
     'I thought you liked walking in the dark,' said Frodo. 'But there is no 
great  hurry.  Merry expects  us some time the day after  tomorrow; but that 
leaves us nearly two days more. We'll halt at the first likely spot.' 
     'The  wind's in  the West,' said Sam. 'If  we get to the other  side of 
this hill,  we shall find  a spot  that  is  sheltered and snug  enough, sir. 
There is  a dry fir-wood just ahead,  if  I  remember rightly.' Sam knew the 
land well  within twenty miles of  Hobbiton, but that was  the  limit of his 
geography. 
     Just  over the  top  of  the  hill they came on  the patch of fir-wood. 
Leaving  the  road  they  went into  the deep resin -scented  darkness of the 
trees, and  gathered  dead  sticks and cones to make a fire. Soon they had a  
merry crackle of flame at the foot of a large fir-tree and they sat round it 
for  a while, until they began to nod. Then, each in an  angle  of the great 
tree's roots, they curled  up  in  their cloaks and blankets, and were  soon 
fast asleep. They set no  watch; even Frodo feared  no danger yet,  for they 
were still in  the heart  of the Shire. A few  creatures came and  looked at 

####-them when the fire had died away. A fox passing through the wood on business 
of his own stopped several minutes and sniffed. 
     'Hobbits!' he thought. 'Well, what next? I have heard of strange doings 
in this land,  but  I have  seldom  heard of a hobbit  sleeping out of doors 
under a tree. Three of them! There's something mighty queer behind this.' He 
was quite right, but he never found out any more about it. 
     The morning came,  pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that 
a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck was stiff. 
     'Walking for pleasure! Why didn't  I drive?'  he thought, as he usually 
did at the beginning of an expedition. 'And all  my  beautiful feather  beds 
are sold to the Sackville-Bagginses! These  tree -roots would  do them good.' 
He stretched. 'Wake up, hobbits!' he cried. It's a beautiful morning.' 
     'What's beautiful about it?' said Pippin, peering  over the edge of his 
blanket with one eye. 'Sam! Gel breakfast ready for half-past nine! Have you 
got the bath-water hot?' 
     Sam jumped up,  looking rather  bleary. 'No,  sir, I haven't, sir!'  he 
said. 
     Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and  rolled him  over, and then 
walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was rising red out 
of the mists that lay thick  on  the world. Touched  with  gold and red  the 
autumn trees seemed to  be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below 
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared. 
     When  he returned  Sam  and  Pippin had got a good fire going. 'Water!' 
shouted Pippin. 'Where's the water?' 
     'I  don't keep  water in my  pockets,' said  Frodo. 'We thought you had 
gone to find  some,' said Pippin, busy  setting out the food, and cups. 'You  
had better go now.' 
     'You  can come too,'  said  Frodo, 'and  bring  all the water -bottles.' 
There was  a stream at the foot of the hill. They  filled their  bottles and 
the small  camping kettle at a little fall  where the water fell  a few feet 
over an outcrop  of grey stone. It  was  icy cold;  and they spluttered  and 
puffed as they bathed their faces and hands.  
     When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed up again, it 
was after  ten o'clock, and the day was beginning to turn fine and hot. They 
went  down the slope, and across the stream where  it  dived under the road,  
and up the next slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by 
that time their cloaks, blankets, water , food, and other gear already seemed 

####-a heavy burden. 
     The day's march promised to be warm and tiring  work. After some miles, 
however, the road  ceased to roll up and  down: it climbed  to the  top of a  
steep bank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to  go down 
for  the last time. In front of  them they saw  the lower lands  dotted with 
small clumps of  trees that melted away in  the distance to a brown woodland 
haze. They were looking across the  Woody End towards  the Brandywine 
River. 
The road wound away before them like a piece of string. 
     'The road goes on  for ever,' said Pippin; 'but I can't without a rest. 
It is  high time for lunch.' He sat down on the bank at the side of the road 
and looked  away east into the haze, beyond which lay the River, and the end 
of the Shire in which he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round 
eyes were wide open  - for he was looking across lands he had never seen to a 
new horizon. 
     'Do Elves live in those woods?' he asked. 
     'Not that I ever  heard,' said Pippin.  Frodo  was silent.  He  too was 
gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it  before. Suddenly 
he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly: 
     The Road goes ever on and on  
     Down from the door where it began. 
     Now far ahead the Road has gone, 
     And I must follow, if I can, 
     Pursuing it with weary feet, 
     Until it joins some larger way, 
     Where many paths and errands meet. 
     And whither then? I cannot say. 
     'That sounds  like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming,' said Pippin. 'Or is it 
one of your imitations? It does not sound altogether encouraging.' 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo. It came to me then, as  if I was making  it 
up; but I  may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds  me very much of 
Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was 
only  one  Road;  that it was like a great river: its  springs were at every 
doorstep,  and every path was  its  tributary. "It's  a dangerous  business,  
Frodo, going out of your door," he used to say. "You step into the Road, and 
if you don't keep your feet,  there is no knowing where  you might  be swept  
off to.  Do you realize  that  this  is the  very  path  that  goes  through 

####-Mirkwood,  and that if you  let it, it  might take you to the Lonely Mountain 
or  even  further and to worse places?"  He  used to say  that  on  the path 
outside the  front door at  Bag End, especially  after he had been out for a  
long walk.' 
     'Well,  the Road won't sweep me  a nywhere for an  hour  at least,' said 
Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example,  putting their 
packs against the bank and their  legs out  into the road. After a rest they 
had a good lunch, and then more rest. 
     The sun was beginning to get  low and the light of afternoon was on the 
land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road. 
This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was little 
traffic to  the Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour  or 
more when Sam  stopped a  moment as  if  listening. They were  now on  level 
ground,  and  the  road  after  much  winding  lay  straight  ahead  through 
grass-land sprinkled with tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.  
     'I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,' said Sam. 
     They  looked back, but the turn of the  road prevented them from seeing 
far. 'I wonder if that  is Gandalf coming after us,' said Frodo; but even as 
he said it, he had a feeling  that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide 
from the view of the rider came over him. 
     'It  may not matter much,' he  said apologetically, 'but I would rather  
not be seen on the  road  - by anyone. I am  sick of my  doings being noticed  
and discussed. And if  it is Gandalf,' he added as  an afterthought, 'we can 
give him  a little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let's get out 
of sight!' 
     The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow not 
far  from the  road. There  they lay  flat. Frodo  hesitated  for  a second: 
curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire  to hide. The 
sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of 
long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his head 
and peered cautiously above one of the great roots. 
     Round the  corner came  a black horse, no hobbit-pony  but a full-sized 
horse;  and  on  it sat  a large man,  who seemed to  crouch in  the saddle, 
wrapped in a great black  cloak and  hood, so that only his boots in the high 
stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and invisible. 
     When it reached the  tree and was level with Frodo  the  horse stopped. 
The riding figure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From 

####-inside the hood came  a  noise as of  someone sniffing to  catch an  elusive 
scent; the head turned from side to side of the road. 
     A sudden  unreasoning  fear of  discovery laid hold  of Frodo,  and  he 
thought  of his Ring. He hardly dared  to breathe,  and yet the desire to get 
it out of his pocket became so strong that he began slowly to move his hand. 
He felt  that  he had only to  slip  it on, and then he  would  be safe. The 
advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. 'And I am still in 
the Shire,' he thought, as his hand touched the chain on  which  it hung. At  
that moment  the  rider  sat up,  and  shook the  reins.  The  horse stepped 
forward, walking slowly at first, and then breaking into a quick trot. 
     Frodo crawled to  the edge of the road and watched the rider,  until he 
dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it seemed to him 
that suddenly, before it  passed out  of sight,  the horse turned aside  and 
went into the trees on the right. 
     'Well, I  call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,' said  Frodo  to 
himself, as he  walked towards his companions. Pippin and  Sam  had remained 
flat  in the  grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo  described the rider and 
his strange behaviour. 
     'I can't say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling for me; 
and also I felt certain that I did  not want him to discover  me. I've never 
seen or fell anything like it in the Shire before.' 
     'But what has  one of the Big  People got  to do with us?' said Pippin. 
'And what is he doing in this part of the world?' 
     'There are some Men about,' said Frodo. 'Down in the Southfarthing they  
have  had trouble  with Big  People,  I believe. But I have  never heard  of 
anything like this rider. I wonder  where he comes from.' 
     'Begging  your  pardon,' put  in Sam  suddenly,  'I know where he comes 
from. It's from Hobbiton that  this here black  rider comes, unless  there's 
more than one. And I know where he's going to.' 
     'What do you mean?' said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment.  
'Why didn't you speak up before?' 
     'I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back to 
our  hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me: Hello, Sam! 
he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been a  
strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he's only just gone. 
I've sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I liked the sound of him. He seemed 
mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had  left his old home for good. 

####-Hissed at me, he did.  It gave me quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was  
he? says I to the Gaffer. / don't know,  says he; but he wasn't a hobbit. He 
was tall and black-like, and he  stooped aver me. I reckon it was one of the 
Big Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny. 
     'I  couldn't stay  to  hear more, sir, since  you were  waiting; and  I 
didn't give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and more than 
a bit blind,  and it  must have been  near dark when this fellow come up the 
Hill  and  found him taking the air at the end of our Row. I hope  he hasn't 
done no harm, sir, nor me.' 
     'The Gaffer can't be blamed anyway,' said Frodo. 'As a matter of fact I 
heard him talking to a  stranger, who  seemed to  be inquiring for me, and I 
nearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had, or you had told me about 
it before. I might have been more careful on the road.' 
     'Still, there may be no connexion between  this rider and the  Gaffer's 
stranger,' said Pippin. 'We left Hobbiton  secretly enough, and  I don't see 
how he could have followed us.' 
     'What about the smelling, sir?' said Sam. 'And the Gaffer said he was a  
black chap.' 
     'I wish  I had  waited  for  Gandalf,' Frodo  muttered. 'But perhaps it 
would only have made matters worse.' 
     'Then you know  or guess something about this  rider?' said Pippin, who 
had caught the muttered words.  
     'I don't know, and I would rather  not guess,'  said Frodo. 'All right, 
cousin Frodo! You can  keep your  secret for the present,  if you want to be 
mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do? I should like a  bite and  a  
sup,  but somehow  I think  we had better move on from here.  Your  talk  of 
sniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me.' 
     'Yes, I think we  will move on now,' said Frodo;  'but  not on the road 
-in case  that rider comes back, or another  follows him. We  ought to do  a  
good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.' 
     The shadows  of  the trees  were long and  thin  on the  grass, as they 
started off again. They now kept  a stone's throw to  the left of  the road, 
and kept out of sight of it as much  as they  could. But this hindered them; 
for the grass was thick and  tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the  trees 
began to draw together into thickets.  
     The sun had gone down  red behind the hills at their backs, and evening 
was coming on before they came back to the road at the end of the long level 

####-over which  it had run straight for  some miles.  At that point it bent left 
and  went down into the lowlands of  the Yale  making for Stock;  but a lane 
branched right, winding  through a  wood of ancient oak-trees on its way  to 
Woodhall. 'That is the way for us,' said Frodo. 
     Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk  of a tree: it 
was  still alive  and had leaves  on  the small branches that it had put out 
round the  broken  stumps of its long-fallen limbs; but it  was hollow,  and 
could  be entered  by  a great  crack  on the  side  away from the road. The 
hobbits crept inside, and sat there upon a floor  of old leaves and  decayed 
wood.  They rested and had a light  meal, talking quietly and listening from 
time to time. 
     Twilight  was about  them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind 
was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the  road began to 
fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A  star  came out above the trees in 
the darkening East before them.  They went  abreast  and in step, to keep up 
their spirits.  After  a time, as the stars  grew thicker and  brighter, the 
feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longer listened  for the sound of 
hoofs. They began to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk 
along,  especially  when  they  are drawing near to home at night. With most  
hobbits  it  is  a supper -song  or a bed-song;  but these  hobbits  hummed a  
walking-song (though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed). 
Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune  that  was as old as  the hills, 
and taught  it to Frodo as they walked in the  lanes of the Water -valley and 
talked about Adventure. 
     Upon the hearth the fire is red, 
     Beneath the roof there is a bed; 
     But not yet weary are our feet, 
     Still round the corner we may meet 
     A sudden tree or standing stone 
     That none have seen but we alone. 
     Tree and flower and leaf and grass, 
     Let them pass! Let them pass! 
     Hill and water under sky, 
     Pass them by! Pass them by! 
 
     Still round the corner there may  wait 
     A new road or a secret gate, 

####-     And though we pass them by today, 
     Tomorrow we may come this way 
     And take the hidden paths that run 
     Towards the Moon or to the Sun. 
     Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe, 
     Let them go! Let them go! 
     Sand and stone and pool and dell, 
     Fare you well! Fare you well! 
 
     Home is behind, the world ahead, 
     And there are many paths to tread 
     Through shadows to the edge of night, 
     Until the stars are all alight. 
     Then world behind and home ahead, 
     We'll wander back to home and bed. 
     Mist and twilight, cloud and shade, 
     Away shall fade! Away shall fade! 
     Fire and lamp, and meat and bread, 
     And then to bed! And then to bed! 
     The song ended. 'And now to bed! And now to bed!' sang Pippin in a high 
voice. 
     'Hush!' said Frodo. 'I think I hear hoofs again.' 
     They slopped suddenly  and  stood as silent as tree-shadows, listening. 
There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, some way behind, but coming slow and 
clear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and  ran 
into the deeper shade under the oak-trees. 
     'Don't let  us go too far!' said Frodo. 'I don't want to be seen, but I 
want to see if it is another Black Rider.' 
     'Very well!' said Pippin. 'But don't forget the sniffing!' 
     The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place better  
than the general  darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a 
large tree-bole, while  Frodo  crept back a few yards  towards  the lane. It 
showed grey and pale, a line  of fading light through the wood. Above it the 
stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon. 
     The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something dark pass 
across  the lighter  space between two trees, and then halt. It looked  like 
the  black shade of a horse led by a smaller black  shadow. The black shadow 

####-stood close  to the point where they had left the  path, and it  swayed from 
side to side. Frodo thought he heard the sound of  snuffling. The shadow bent 
to the ground, and then began to crawl towards him. 
     Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but this time 
it was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before he  realized what 
he was  doing, his hand was groping  in his pocket. But at that moment there 
came  a sound  like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in  
the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up and retreated.  It climbed 
on to the  shadowy  horse  and  seemed  to  vanish  across the lane into the 
darkness on the other side. Frodo breathed again. 
     'Elves!' exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. 'Elves, sir!' He would have 
burst  out of the trees and dashed off towards  the voices, if they  had not 
pulled him back. 
     'Yes,  it  is Elves,' said  Frodo. 'One can meet them sometimes  in the 
Woody End.  They don't live in the Shire, but they  wander into it in Spring 
and  Autumn,  out  of their own  lands away  beyond the  Tower Hills.  I  am 
thankful that they do! You did not  see, but  that Black  Rider stopped just  
here and was actually crawling towards us when the song began. As soon as he 
heard the voices he slipped away.' 
     'What  about the Elves?'  said  Sam, too  excited  to trouble about the 
rider. 'Can't we go and see them?' 
     'Listen! They are coming this way,' said Frodo. 'We have only to wait.' 
The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above  the others.  It was 
singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew only a little, and the 
others knew nothing. Yet  the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape 
itself  in their thought into words which they only partly understood.  This 
was the song as Frodo heard it: 
     Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear! 
     O Queen beyond the Western Seas! 
     O Light to us that wander here 
     Amid the world of woven trees! 
 
     Gilthoniel! O Elbereth! 
     Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath! 
     Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee 
     In a far land beyond the Sea. 
 

####-     O stars that in the Sunless Year 
     With shining hand by her were sawn, 
     In windy fields now bright and clear 
     We see your silver blossom blown! 
 
     O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! 
     We still remember, we who dwell 
     In this far land beneath the trees, 
     Thy starlight on the Western Seas. 
     The  song  ended.  'These  are High  Elves!  They  spoke  the  name  of 
Elbereth!' said Frodo in amazement,  'Few of that fairest folk are ever seen 
in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth,  east  of the  Great Sea. 
This is indeed a strange chance!' 
     The hobbits  sat in shadow  by the wayside. Before long the Elves  came 
down the lane towards the valley. They  passed slowly, and the hobbits could 
see the starlight glimmering on their hair and  in their  eyes. They bore no  
lights,  yet as they walked a  shimmer, like the light of the moon above the 
rim of the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. They were 
now silent, and  as the last Elf  passed  he turned  and looked  towards the 
hobbits and laughed. 
     'Hail,  Frodo!' he  cried. 'You  are  abroad  late. Or are  you perhaps 
lost?'  Then he called aloud  to the others, and all the company stopped and 
gathered round. 
     'This  is indeed  wonderful!'  they  said. 'Three hobbits in  a wood at 
night! We  have not seen  such a thing  since Bilbo went away.  What is  the 
meaning of it?' 
     'The meaning of it, fair people,'  said Frodo, 'is simply that  we seem 
to be going the same  way as you are. I like  walking under the stars. But I 
would welcome your company.' 
     'But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are  so  dull,' they 
laughed. 'And how do you know that we go the same way as you, for you do 
not 
know whither we are going?' 
     'And how do you know my name?' asked Frodo in return. 
     'We know many things,'  they said. 'We have seen you often before  with 
Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.' 
     'Who are you, and who is your lord?' asked Frodo. 

####-     'I am Gildor,' answered their leader, the Elf who had first hailed him. 
'Gildor Inglorion of  the  House  of Finrod. We are Exiles, and most of  our 
kindred have long  ago  departed and  we  too are  now only  tarrying here a  
while, ere we return  over the Great Sea.  But some  of  our kinsfolk  dwell 
still  in peace in Rivendell.  Come now, Frodo, tell us what you  are doing?  
For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you.' 
     'O Wise  People!' interrupted Pippin eagerly. 'Tell us about  the Black  
Riders!' 
     'Black Riders?' they said  in  low voices. 'Why  do you ask a bout Black  
Riders?' 
     'Because two Black Riders have  overtaken us today,  or one has done so 
twice,' said Pippin;  'only a little while ago  he slipped away as you  drew 
near.' 
     The Elves did not answer at  once, but spoke together  softly  in their 
own tongue.  At length Gildor turned to the  hobbits. 'We  will not speak of 
this here,' he said. 'We think you had  best come now with us. It is not our 
custom, but for this time we will lake you on our road, and  you shall lodge 
with us tonight, if you  will.' 
     'O Fair  Folk!  This is good fortune beyond my hope,' said  Pippin. Sam 
was speechless.  'I  thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,' said Frodo bowing. 
'Elen snla l®menn' omentielvo, a star shines on the hour of our meeting,' he 
added in the high-elven speech. 
     'Be careful,  friends!' cried  Gildor laughing. 'Speak no secrets! Here 
is  a  scholar in  the  Ancient  Tongue.  Bilbo  was a  good  master.  Hail, 
Elf-friend!' he said, bowing to Frodo.  'Come now with your friends and join 
our company! You had best walk in the middle so  that you may not stray. You  
may be weary before we halt.' 
     'Why? Where are you going?' asked Frodo. 
     'For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall. It is some 
miles, but  you shall have  rest at  the  end of it, and it will shorten your 
journey tomorrow.' 
     They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows and faint 
lights: for  Elves  (even  more  than hobbits)  could walk when they  wished  
without sound or footfall.  Pippin soon began  to feel sleepy, and staggered 
once  or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his side  put out  his  arm  and 
saved him from a  fall. Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a  dream, 
with an expression on his face half of fear and half of astonished  joy. 

####-     The  woods on either side became denser; the trees were now younger and 
thicker;  and as the lane went lower, running down into a fold of the hills, 
there were many deep brakes of hazel on the rising slopes at either hand. At  
last the Elves turned aside from the path.  A  green ride  lay almost unseen 
through the  thickets on the right; and this they  followed as it wound away 
back up the  wooded slopes on to the  top of a shoulder of  the  hills  that 
stood out into the lower land of the river -valley. Suddenly they came out of 
the shadow of  the trees, and  before them lay a  wide space of  grass, grey 
under the night. On three sides the woods  pressed upon it; but eastward the 
ground fell steeply and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of 
the slope,  were  below their feet. Beyond, the  low lands  lay dim and flat 
under the stars.  Nearer  at hand  a few lights twinkled  in the village  of 
Woodhall. 
     The  Elves sat on  the grass  and spoke  together in  soft voices; they 
seemed to take no further  notice of the hobbits.  Frodo and his  companions 
wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets, and drowsiness stole  over  them. 
The  night grew  on,  and  the  lights in the valley  went out. Pippin  fell 
asleep, pillowed on a green hillock. 
     Away  high  in the East swung Remmirath,  the Netted Stars,  and slowly 
above  the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of fire. Then by some 
shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil, and there leaned  up, 
as  he  climbed  over  the  rim  of the  world, the  Swordsman  of  the  Sky, 
Menelvagor with  his shining  belt. The  Elves all burst into song. Suddenly 
under the trees a fire sprang up with a red light. 
     'Come!' the  Elves called to the hobbits. 'Come!  Now is  the time  for 
speech and merriment!' 
     Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. 'There is a fire in the 
hall, and food for hungry guests,' said an Elf standing before him. 
     At the south  end of the greensward  there  was an opening.  There  the 
green  floor  ran on into the wood, and formed a  wide  space like  a  hall, 
roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like pillars down each 
side. In the middle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars 
torches with lights of gold and silver were burning  steadily. The Elves sat 
round the  fire upon the grass or  upon the  sawn  rings of old trunks. Some 
went  to  and  fro bearing cups and  pouring  drink; others brought  food on 
heaped plates and dishes.  
     'This  is poor fare,' they said  to the hobbits; 'for we are lodging in 

####-the greenwood far from  our halls. If ever  you are our guests at  home,  we 
will treat you better.' 
     'It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,' said Frodo. 
     Pippin afterwards recalled little o f either food or drink, for his mind 
was  filled  with the  light upon the elf-faces, and the  sound of voices so 
various and so beautiful that he felt in a waking  dream.  But he remembered  
that there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair white  loaf to one who 
is starving;  and fruits  sweet  as  wildberries  and richer than the tended 
fruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was filled with a fragrant draught, 
cool as a clear fountain, golden as a summer afternoon. 
     Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself, what 
he felt or thought that  night, though it remained in  his  memory as one of 
the chief  events of his life.  The  nearest he  ever got was to say: 'Well, 
sir, if I could grow  apples like that, I would call  myself a gardener. But 
it was the singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.' 
     Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind was 
chiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech and listened 
eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served him and thanked them in 
their own language. They smiled at  him  and said laughing: 'Here is a jewel 
among hobbits!' 
     After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne away 
to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed and  slept the 
rest  of the night away. Sam refused to  leave  his  master. When Pippin had 
gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and 
closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with Gildor. 
     They  spoke of many things, old  and new,  and Frodo questioned  Gildor  
much about happenings  in the wide world outside the Shire. The tidings were 
mostly  sad and ominous: of  gathering  darkness, the wars  of Men,  and the 
flight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked  the question  that  was nearest to 
his heart: 
     'Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?' 
     Gildor  smiled.  'Yes,' he answered.  'Twice. He said farewell to us on 
this very  spot. But I saw  him once again, far  from here.' He would say no 
more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent. 
     'You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,' said 
Gildor. 'But I already know a little, and I  can read more in your  face and 
in the thought behind your questions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you  

####-doubt that you will find  what you seek, or accomplish what  you intend,  or  
that you will ever return. Is not that so?' 
     'It is,' said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to 
Gandalf and my faithful Sam.' He looked down at Sam, who was snoring 
gently. 
     'The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,' said Gildor. 
     'The Enemy?' said Frodo. 'Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?' 
     'I  do not know  for what  reason the Enemy is pursuing you,'  answered 
Gildor; 'but I perceive that he is  - strange indeed though that seems to me. 
And I warn  you  that peril is now both before you  and behind you, and upon 
either side.' 
     'You  mean the Riders? I feared  that  they were servants of the Enemy. 
What are the Black Riders?' 
     'Has Gandalf told you nothing?' 
     'Nothing about such creatures.' 
     'Then I think it  is not  for me to say more  - lest terror should keep 
you from your journey. For it seems to me that you  have set out only just in 
time, if  indeed you are in time. You must now make  haste, and neither stay 
nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.' 
     'I cannot  imagine what information could be more terrifying  than your 
hints  and warnings,' exclaimed Frodo. 'I knew  that  danger lay  ahead,  of 
course; but I did not expect to  meet it in  our  own Shire.  Can't a hobbit 
walk from the Water to the River in peace?' 
     'But  it is not your own Shire,' said Gildor. 'Others dwelt here before 
hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more. The 
wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for  
ever fence it out.' 
     'I know - and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What can I 
do  now?  My  plan was  to  leave  the Shire  secretly, and  make my  way to 
Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.' 
     'I  think you should still follow that  plan,'  said Gildor.  'I do not 
think the Road  will prove too  hard for  your courage. But  if  you  desire 
clearer counsel, you should ask  Gandalf. I do not know the reason  for your  
flight, and therefore I do not know by what means your  pursuers will assail  
you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you  will see him before 
you leave the Shire?' 
     'I hope so. But that is another  thing that  makes  me anxious. I  have 

####-been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come to Hobbiton at 
the 
latest two  nights  ago; but he has  never appeared. Now I am wondering what 
can have happened. Should I wait for him?' 
     Gildor  was silent for a moment. 'I do not like this news,' he said  at 
last.  'That Gandalf should be late, does not  bode well. But it is said: Do 
not meddle  in  the  affairs  o f Wizards, for they  are subtle  and quick to  
anger. The choice is yours: to go or wait.' 
     'And  it  is also  said,'  answered  Frodo:  'Go not  to the  Elves for 
counsel, for they will say both no and yes.' 
     'Is it  indeed?' laughed Gildor. 'Elves  seldom give  unguarded advice, 
for advice is a  dangerous gift,  even from  the  wise to the wise, and  all 
courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told me all concerning 
yourself; and how then shall  I choose better  than you? But if  you  demand  
advice, I will for friendship's sake give it.  I think you  should now go at 
once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out, then I  
also advise  this:  do not  go  alone. Take such friends  as are trusty  and 
willing. Now you should be grateful, for I do  not give this counsel gladly. 
The Elves have their  own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little  
concerned  with the ways of  hobbits,  or of any other creatures upon earth. 
Our  paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting  there 
may be more than chance; but the purpose  is not clear to  me, and I fear to 
say too much.' 
     'I am  deeply grateful,' said  Frodo;  'but  I  wish you would  tell me 
plainly what the  Black  Riders  are. If I  take your  advice I may not  see 
Gandalf for  a  long while,  and I ought to know what  is  the  danger  that 
pursues me.' 
     'Is  it not  enough to  know  that they  are servants  of  the  Enemy?' 
answered Gildor. 'Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are deadly. Ask no 
more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is ended, you,  Frodo son of 
Drogo, will  know more  of  these  fell things than  Gildor  Inglorion.  May 
Elbereth protect you!' 
     'But where shall I find courage?' asked Frodo. 'That is what I  chiefly 
need.' 
     'Courage is found in unlikely places,' said  Gildor. 'Be  of good hope!  
Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but we will send our  messages 

####-through  the lands.  The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey, 
and 
those that have power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend; 
and  may the stars shine upon the end  of your road! Seldom have we had such 
delight in strangers,  and it  is  fair to hear words  of the Ancient Speech 
from the lips of other wanderers in the world.' 
     Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor  finished speaking. 'I  
will sleep now,' he said; and the  Elf led him to a bower beside Pippin, and 
he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber. 
 

####- 

Chapter 4. A Short Cut to Mushrooms 

 
 
     In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in  a bower made by a 
living tree  with branches laced  and drooping to the ground; his bed was of 
fern and grass,  deep and soft  and  strangely fragrant. The sun was shining 
through  the fluttering leaves,  which were still green  upon the  tree.  He 
jumped up and went out. 
     Sam  was  sitting  on the grass near the  edge  of the wood. Pippin was 
standing studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the Elves.  
     'They have left us fruit  and drink, and bread,' said Pippin. 'Come and 
have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night. I 
did not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted.' 
     Frodo  sat  down  beside  Sam and began  to eat. 'Wha t is the  plan for  
today?' asked Pippin. 
     'To  walk  to Bucklebury as  quickly as possible,'  answered Frodo, and 
gave his attention to the food. 
     'Do you think  we shall see  anything  of  those Riders?' asked  Pippin 
cheerfully. Under  the  morning  sun the prospect of seeing a whole troop of 
them did not seem very alarming to him. 
     'Yes, probably,' said Frodo, not liking  the reminder. 'But  I  hope to 
get across the river without their seeing us.' 
     'Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?' 
     'Not much  - only hints and riddles,' said Frodo evasively. 'Did you ask  
about the sniffing?' 
     'We didn't discuss it,' said Frodo with his mouth full. 
     'You should have. I am sure it is very important.' 
     'In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused  to explain it,' said 
Frodo sharply. 'And now leave me in peace  for a bit! I don't want to answer  
a string of questions while I am eating. I want to think!' 
     'Good heavens!' said Pippin. 'At breakfast?' He walked away towards the 
edge of the green. 
     From Frodo's mind the bright morning - treacherously bright, he thought  
- had not banished the fear of pursuit; and he pondered the words of Gildor. 
The merry voice of Pippin came to him. He was running  on the green turf and 
singing. 

####-     'No!  I could  not!' he said  to  himself.  'It is one thing to take my 
young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary, 
and food  and  bed are  sweet.  To  take them into exile,  where  hunger and 
weariness may ha ve  no cure,  is quite another  - even if they are willing to 
come. The inheritance  is mine  alone.  I don't think I  ought  even to take 
Sam.' He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him. 
     'Well, Sam!' he said. 'What about it? I am leaving the Shire as soon as 
ever I  can - in fact I  have made up my mind now not even to wait  a day at 
Crickhollow, if it can be helped.' 
     'Very good, sir!' 
     'You still mean to come with me?' 
     'I do.' 
     'It  is going to be very dangerous, Sam. 'It is already dangerous. Most  
likely neither of us will come back.' 
     'If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain,' said Sam. 
'Don't you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never mean to. I 
am  going  with  him, if   he climbs to the Moon,  and if  any of those Black 
Rulers try to stop him, they'll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with, I said. They 
laughed.' 
     'Who are they, and what are you talking about?' 
     'The  Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and  they seemed to know 
you were going away, so I didn't see the use of denying  it. Wonderful folk, 
Elves, sir! Wonderful!' 
     'They are,' said Frodo.  'Do you like  them still,  now  you have had a  
closer view?' 
     'They  seem a bit above my likes and dislikes,  so  to speak,' answered 
Sam slowly. 'It don't seem to matter what I think about them. They are quite 
different from what I expected - so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it 
were.' 
     Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some  outward 
sign of the odd change that seemed  to have come  over him. It did not sound 
like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he  knew. But it looked 
like the old  Sam Gamgee sitting  there, except that  his face was unusually 
thoughtful. 
     'Do  you feel any  need to  leave the Shire now  - now that your wish to 
see them has come true already?' he asked. 
     'Yes,  sir. I  don't  know how to  say it, but after last night  I feel 

####-different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind  of way.  I know  we are going  to 
take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can't turn back. It isn't  
to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that  I want  - I don't rightly 
know what I  want: but I  have something to do before the end, and  it  lies 
ahead, not  in the Shire. I must see it through, sir, if you understand me.' 
     'I don't  altogether.  But I  understand  that Gandalf chose me a  good 
companion. I am content. We will go together.' 
     Frodo finished his  breakfast in silence.  Then standing  up he  looked 
over the land ahead, and called to Pippin. 
     'All ready to start?' he said as Pippin ran up. 'We must be getting off 
at once. We slept late; and there are a good many miles to go.' 
     'You slept  late, you mean,' said Pippin. 'I was up long before; and we 
are only waiting for you to finish eating and thinking.' 
     'I  have finished both now. And I am going to make for Bucklebury Ferry 
as quickly  as possible. I am not  going out of the way, back to the road we 
left last night: I am going to  cut straight across country from here.' 
     'Then you are going to fly,'  said Pippin.  'You  won't cut straight on 
foot anywhere in this country.' 
     'We  can  cut  straighter than the road anyway,'  answered  Frodo. 'The 
Ferry is east from Woodhall;  but the hard road curves away to the left  -you  
can see a bend of it away north over there. It goes round  the north  end of 
the Marish so as to  strike  the causeway from  the  Bridge above Stock. But 
that is miles out of the way.  We could save a quarter  of the distance if we 
made a line for the Ferry from where we stand.' 
     'Short cuts make  long delays,' argued  Pippin. 'The  country  is rough 
round  here, and  there are bogs and  all  kinds of difficulties down in the 
Marish -I know the land  in these parts. And if you are worrying about Black 
Riders, I can't  see that it is any worse meeting  them on  a road than in a  
wood or a field.' 
     'It is  less  easy  to find people in the  woods and  fields,' answered 
Frodo. 'And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some chance that 
you will be looked for on the road and not off it.' 
     'All right!' said Pippin. 'I will follow  you into every bog and ditch. 
But it is  hard! I had counted  on  passing the Golden Perch at Stock before 
sundown. The best beer in the Eastfarthing, or used to be: it is a long time 
since I tasted it.' 
     'That settles it!'  said Frodo. 'Short cuts  make delays, but inns make 

####-longer  ones. At all costs we must  keep  you away from the Golden Perch. We 
want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?' 
     'I  will go  along with you, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam (in spite of  private 
misgiving and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing). 
     'Then  if we are going to toil  through bog and briar, let's  go  now!' 
said Pippin. 
     It was  already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but clouds 
were  beginning  to come up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain. 
The hobbits scrambled down a steep  green  bank and  plunged into the  thick 
trees below. Their course  had been chosen to  leave Woodhall to their left, 
and  to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side 
of  the  hills,  until they reached the flats  beyond. Then they  could make 
straight  for the Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches 
and fences. Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line. 
     He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than it  had 
appeared. There were no paths  in the  undergrowth, and they did not  get on 
very  fast.  When they had struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a  
stream  running  down from  the hills behind in a deeply dug bed with  steep 
slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most inconveniently it cut across the 
line they had chosen. They could  not jump over it, nor indeed get across it 
at  all without  getting wet, scratched, and muddy.  They  halted, wondering  
what to do.  'First check!' said Pippin, smiling grimly. 
     Sam Gamgee  looked back.  Through an opening  in  the trees he caught a 
glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down. 
     'Look!'  he said, clutching  Frodo by the  arm. They all looked, and on 
the edge high above  them they saw against the sky a horse  standing. Beside 
it stooped a black figure. 
     They  at once gave  up any  idea of going back. Frodo led  the way, and 
plunged quickly into the  thick bushes beside the stream. 'Whew!' he said to  
Pippin. 'We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but   we 
got under  cover only just in time. You've got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear  
anything coming?' 
     They  stood still,  almost holding  their breath as  they listened; but 
there was  no sound  of pursuit. 'I  don't fancy  he  would try bringing his 
hor se down that bank,' said Sam. 'But I guess he  knows we came down it.  We 
had better be going on.' 
     Going  on was  not altogether easy.  They had packs  to carry,  and the 

####-bushes and  brambles were reluctant to  let  them through. They were cut off  
from the wind by  the ridge behind, and the air  was still  and stuffy. When 
they forced their way at last into more open ground, they were hot and tired 
and very scratched, and they were also no longer certain of the direction in 
which they  were  going.  The banks of  the stream sank,  as it reached  the 
levels and  became broader  and shallower,  wandering off towards the Marish 
and the River. 
     'Why,  this  is  the Stock-brook!' said Pippin. 'If we are going to try 
and get back on to our course, we must  cross at once and bear right.' 
     They waded  the  stream, and hurried over a wide open space, rush-grown 
and treeless, on the  further side. Beyond that they came again to a belt of 
trees: tall oaks, for the most part, with here  and there an elm tree or  an 
ash. The ground was fairly level, and  there was little undergrowth; but the 
trees were loo close for them to see far  ahead.  The leaves blew upwards in 
sudden gusts of wind, and spots of rain began to fall from the overcast sky. 
Then the wind died  away and the rain came streaming down. They trudged 
along 
as fast as they could, over patches of grass, and through  thick  drifts  of 
old leaves; and all about them the rain pattered  and trickled. They did not 
talk, but kept glancing back, and from side to side. 
     After  half an hour Pippin said: 'I hope  we  have not turned  too much 
towards the south, and are not walking longwise through this wood! It is not  
a very broad belt --I should  have said  no more than a mile at the widest  - 
and we ought to have been through it by now.' 
     'It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,' said Frodo. 'That won't  
mend  matters. Let us keep on as we  are going! I am not sure that I want to 
come out into the open yet.' 
     They  went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then the sun gleamed 
out of ragged clouds  again and the rain  lessened. It was now past mid-day,  
and they felt it was high time for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: its 
leaves  though fast turning yellow were still thick, and the  ground at  its 
feel  was fairly dry and sheltered. When  they came to make their meal, they 
found that  the  Elves had  filled their bottles  with  a  clear drink, pale 
golden in colour: it had the scent of a honey made  of many flowers, and was 
wonderfully  refreshing. Very soon they  were  laughing, and snapping  their  
fingers at rain, and at Black Riders.  The last few  miles, they felt, would 
soon be behind them. 

####-     Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam 
and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly: 
     Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go 
     To heal my heart and drown my woe. 
     Rain may fall and wind may blow,  
     And many miles be still to go, 
     But under a tall tree I will lie, 
     And let the clouds go sailing by. 
     Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo 
sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came  down the wind, like  the  cry of 
some evil  and  lonely  creature.  It  rose and fell, and  ended  on  a high 
piercing  note. Even as  they sat and stood, as  if suddenly frozen,  it was 
answered by another  cry, fainter and further off, but no less  chilling  to 
the blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in 
the leaves. 
     'And what do you think that was?' Pippin asked at last, trying to speak 
lightly, but quavering a little. 'If it was a bird, it was  one that I never  
heard in the Shire before.' 
     'It was not bird or beast,' said Frodo. 'It was a call, or  a signal -- 
there were words in that cry, though  I  could not catch them. But no hobbit 
has such a voice.' 
     No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders, but no 
one  spoke of them. They  were now reluctant either to  stay  or go  on; but 
sooner or  later they had got to  get across the  open country to the Ferry, 
and  it was best to go  sooner  and  in daylight.  In a few moments they had 
shouldered their packs again and were off. 
     Before long the wood came  to a  sudden end. Wide grass-lands stretched 
before them. They now saw that  they had, in  fact, turned too much  to  the 
south.  Away over  the  flats  they could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury 
across the River, but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out from 
the edge of the trees,  they set off  across  the  open  as  quickly as they 
could. 
     At first they felt afraid, away from the shelter of  the wood. Far back  
behind them stood the  high place  where  they had  breakfasted.  Frodo half 
expected to see the small distant  figure of  a horseman on  the ridge  dark 
against  the sky; but there was  no sign of  one. The  sun escaping from the 
breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shining 

####-brightly again. Their fear left them, though they still felt uneasy. But the 
land  became  steadily  more  tame and  well-ordered.  Soon they  came  into  
well-tended fields and meadows: there were  hedges  and gates  and dikes for 
drainage. Everything seemed quiet and peaceful, just an  ordinary corner  of 
the Shire. Their spirits rose with every step. The  line  of  the River grew 
nearer; and the Black Riders began  to seem  like phantoms of  the woods now 
left far behind. 
     They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-field, and  came to a stout 
gate.  Beyond it a  rutted  lane ran between low well-laid hedges towards  a  
distant clump of trees. Pippin stopped. 
     'I know these fields and this gate!' he said. 'This is Bamfurlong,  old 
Farmer Maggot's land. That's his farm away there in the trees.' 
     'One trouble after  another!' said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmed 
as if Pippin  had declared the lane was the slot leading to  a dragon's den. 
The others looked at him in surprise. 
     'What's wrong with  old Maggot?' asked Pippin.  'He's a good  friend to 
all the  Brandy  bucks.  Of course he's  a terror to trespassers, and  keeps 
ferocious  dogs  - but after all, folk down here are near the border and have 
to be more on their guard.' 
     'I  know,' said  Frodo. 'But all the same,' he added with  a shamefaced 
laugh,  'I am  terrified of  him and his dogs. I have avoided  his  farm for  
years and  years. He  caught me  several times trespassing after  mushrooms,  
when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat  me, and 
then took  me  and showed  me to his dogs. "See, lads," he  said, "next time 
this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can eat  him. Now see him off!" 
They chased me all the way to the Ferry. I have never got over the  fright  - 
though I  daresay  the beasts knew their business and  would not really have 
touched me.' 
     Pippin laughed. 'Well, it's time you  made it up. Especially if you are 
coming back to live  in Buckland. Old Maggot is really  a stout fellow -  if 
you leave his mushrooms alone. Let's get into the lane and then we shan't be 
trespassing. If we meet him, I'll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry's,  
and I used to come here with him a good deal at one time.' 
     They went along the lane, until they saw the  thatched roofs of a large 
house and farm-buildings peeping ou t among the trees ahead. The Maggots, 
and 
the Puddifoots of  Stock, and most of  the  inhabitants of  the Marish, were 

####-house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall 
all round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out of the  wall into the  
lane. 
     Suddenly  as they drew nearer  a terrific baying and barking broke out, 
and a loud voice was heard shouting: 'Grip! Fang! Wolf! Come on, lads!' 
     Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked  on a few paces. The gate 
opened and  three  huge dogs came  pelting  out  into  the  lane, and dashed 
towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but 
Sam shrank  against the wall, while  two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at him 
suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of the 
three halted in front of Frodo, bristling and growling. 
     Through the gate there now appeared  a broad  thick -set  hobbit  with a  
round  red  face. 'Hallo! Hallo!  And who may you  be, and what  may you  be 
wanting?' he asked. 
     'Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!' said Pippin. 
     The farmer looked at  him closely. 'Well, if it  isn't Master Pippin   - 
Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!' he cried, changing from a scowl to a grin. 
'It's a long time since I saw you round here. It's lucky for you that I know 
you. I was just going out to  set my dogs  on  any strangers. There are some 
funny things going  on today. Of course, we do get queer folk  wandering  in  
these parts at times. Too near the River,' he said, shaking his  head.  'But 
this fellow was the most outlandish I have ever set eyes  on. He won't cross 
my land without leave a second time, not if I can stop it.' 
     'What fellow do you mean?' asked Pippin. 
     'Then you haven't  seen him?' said  the  farmer. 'H e  went up the  lane 
towards the  causeway not  a  long while back. He  was a funny  customer and 
asking funny questions. But perhaps you'll come along inside, and we'll pass 
the news more comfortable. I've a  drop  of good ale on tap, if you and your  
friends are willing, Mr. Took.' 
     It seemed plain that the  farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do 
it in his own time and  fashion, so they all accepted  the invitation. 'What 
about the dogs?' asked Frodo anxiously. 
     The farmer laughed.  'They  won't harm you - not unless I  tell 'em to. 
Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!' he cried. 'Heel, Wolf!'  To the relief of Frodo and 
Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free. 
     Pippin introduced  the other two to the farmer. 'Mr. Frodo Baggins,' he 
said.  'You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall.' At the 

####-name Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a moment 
Frodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused, and 
that 
the dogs would be  told  to see him   off. But Farmer Maggot took him by  the 
arm. 
     'Well, if that isn't queerer than ever?'  he exclaimed. 'Mr. Baggins is 
it? Come inside! We must have a talk.' 
     They went  into the farmer's  kitchen, and sat by  the wide fire-place. 
Mrs. Maggot brought out  beer in  a huge jug, and filled four large mugs. It 
was a good brew,  and Pippin found himself more than compensated for 
missing 
the  Golden  Perch.  Sam  sipped his  beer  suspiciously.  He had a  natural 
mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was not 
disposed to be quick  friends with anyone who had beaten his master, however  
long ago. 
     After  a few remarks about  the weather and the agricultural  prospects 
(which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot put down his  mug and 
looked 
at them all in turn. 
     'Now, Mr.  Peregrin,' he  said,  'where  might you  be coming from, and 
where might you be going  to?  Were you coming to visit' me? For, if so, you 
had gone past my gate without my seeing you.' 
     'Well, no, '  answered Pippin.  'To tell  you the truth, since  you have 
guessed  it, we got into the lane from the other end: we had come  over your  
fields. But that was quite by accident.  We  lost our way in the woods, back  
near Woodhall, trying to take a short cu t to the Ferry.' 
     'If you were  in a hurry,  the road would have served you better,' said 
the farmer. 'But I wasn't worrying about  that. You have  leave to walk over  
my land, if you have a  mind, Mr.  Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins  - though I 
daresay  you  still like mushrooms.'  He laughed.  'Ah yes, I recognized the 
name.  I recollect  the time when young Frodo  Baggins  was one of the worst  
young rascals of Buckland. But it  wasn't mushrooms I was thinking of. I had 
just heard the name Baggins before  you  turned up.  What do you think  that 
funny customer asked me?' 
     They  waited anxiously for  him to go on. 'Well,' the farmer continued, 
approaching his point with slow relish, 'he came riding on a big black horse 
in at  the  gate, which  happened  to be open, and right up to my door.  All 

####-black he was  himself, too, and cloaked and hooded up, as if he did not want 
to be known. "Now what  in the Shire  can  he want?" I thought to myself. We 
don't see many of the Big Folk over the border; and anywa y I had never heard 
of any like this black fellow. 
     ' "Good-day to you!" I says,  going  out to him. "This  lane don't lead 
anywhere,  and wherever  you may be going, your quickest way will be back to 
the road." I didn't like the looks of  him; and when  Grip came out, he took  
one sniff and  let out a  yelp as if he had been slung: he put down his tail 
and bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still. 
     ' "I come  from yonder," he  said,  slow  and stiff-like, pointing back  
west, over my  fields, if you please.  "Have you seen Baggins?" he asked in a  
queer voice,  and bent  down towards  me. I could not see any face,  for his 
hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down  my back. But  I did 
not see why he should come riding over my land so bold. 
     ' "Be off!" I said. "There are no Bagginses  here.  You're in the wrong 
part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton  - but you can  go 
by road this time." 
     ' "Baggins has  left,"  he answered in a whisper. "He is coming. He  is 
not far away. I wish to find him. If he passes will you tell me? I will come 
back with gold." 
     ' "No you won't," I said.  "You'll  go back  where you  belong,  double 
quick. I give you one minute before I call all my dogs." 
     'He gave a sort  of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might not. 
Then he spurred  his great  horse right  at me, and I jumped  out of the way 
only just in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and rode through the 
gate  and up the lane  towards the causeway like a bolt  of thunder. What do  
you think of that?' 
     Frodo sat for a moment looking at  the fire,  but  his only thought was 
how on earth would they  reach the Ferry. 'I don't  know what  to think,' he 
said at last. 
     'Then I'll tell you what to think,' said Maggot. 'You should never have 
gone  mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo.  Folk  are queer  up 
there.'  Sam  stirred in  his  chair,  and  looked  at  the  farmer  with an 
unfriendly  eye. 'But you were always a  reckless lad. When  I heard you had 
left the Brandybucks  and  gone  off  to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you  
were going to find trouble. Mark my words, this  all comes of those  strange 
doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion  in foreign 

####-parts, they  say. Maybe there is some that want  to know what has  become of 
the gold and jewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?' 
     Frodo said  nothing:  the  shrewd  guesses of  the farmer  were  rather  
disconcerting. 
     'Well, Mr. Frodo,' Maggot went  on, 'I'm glad that you've had the sense 
to come back to Buckland. My  advice is: stay  there! And don't get mixed up 
with these outlandish folk.  You'll have  friends  in these parts. If any of 
these black  fellows come after you  again,  I'll  deal with  them. I'll say 
you're dead, or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might be 
true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want news of.' 
     'Maybe you're right,' said Frodo, avoiding the farmer's eye and staring 
at the fire. 
     Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. 'Well, I see  you have ideas of your 
own,' he said. 'It is as plain as my  nose that no  accident brought you and 
that rider here on the same afternoon; and maybe my  news was no  great news 
to you, after all.  I am not asking you to tell me anything you  have a mind 
to keep to yourself; but I see you are in some kind  of trouble. Perhaps you  
are thinking it won't be too easy to get to the Ferry without being caught?' 
     'I was thinking so,' said Frodo. 'But we have got to try and get there; 
and  it won't  be  done by sitting  and thinking. So I am afraid we must  be 
going.  Thank you very much indeed for your kindness! I've been in terror of 
you and your dogs for over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you may laugh 
to hear it. It's a pity: for I've missed a good friend. And now I'm sorry to 
leave so soon. But I'll come back, perhaps, one day  - if I get a chance.' 
     'You'll be welcome when you come,' said Maggot. 'But now I've a notion. 
It's near  sundown  already,  and we are going to  have our  supper; for  we 
mostly go to bed  soon after the Sun. If you and Mr. Peregrin and  all could 
stay and have a bite with us, we would be pleased!' 
     'And so should we!' said  Frodo. 'But  we  must  be going at once,  I'm 
afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.' 
     'Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of supper, I'll 
gel out a small waggon,  and I'll drive you all to the Ferry. That will save 
you a good step, and it might also save you trouble of another sort.' 
     Frodo  now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief  of Pippin 
and  Sam. The sun  was  already behind the  western hills, and the light was 
failing.  Two  of  Maggot's  sons  and his  three  daughters came in, and  a  
generous  supper was  laid  on the large table.  The kitchen  was  lit  with 

####-candles and the fire was mended. Mrs. Maggot  hustled in and out. One or two 
other  hobbits  belonging to the farm-household came in.  In  a short  while 
fourteen  sat  down to eat. There  was beer in plenty,  and a mighty dish of 
mushrooms  and bacon, besides much other solid farmhouse fare. The  dogs lay 
by the fire and gnawed rinds and cracked bones. 
     When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out with a lantern 
and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the guests came out. 
They  threw their  packs  on board  and  climbed in. The farmer sat  in  the 
driving-seat,  and whipped up his two stout  ponies. His  wife stood  in the 
light of the open door. 
     'You  be  careful  of yourself. Maggot!' she called. 'Don't  go arguing 
with any foreigners, and come straight back!' 
     'I will!' said he, and drove out  of the gate. There was  now no breath 
of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was in the air. 
They went without  lights and took it  slowly. After  a mile or two the lane 
came to an end, crossing a deep dike,  and climbing a short slope up  on  to 
the high-banked causeway. 
     Maggot got down and took a good look  either way, north and  south, but 
nothing could  be  seen  in the darkness, and  there was not a sound in  the 
still  air.  Thin  strands  of river -mist  were hanging above the dikes, and 
crawling over the fields.  
     'It's going  to be thick,' said Maggot; 'but  I'll not light my lantern 
till I turn for home. We'll hear anything on the road long before we meet it 
tonight.' 
     It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The  hobbits 
wrapped themselves  up, but their ears were strained for any sound above the 
creak  of  the wheels and the  slow clop of  the ponies' hoofs.  The  waggon 
seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him  Pippin was  nodding towards 
sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog. 
     They reached the  entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked  by 
two tall white posts  that suddenly loomed up  on their right. Farmer Maggot 
drew  in his  ponies  and the  waggon creaked  to a  halt.  They  were  just 
beginning  lo scramble out, when suddenly they heard what  they had all been 
dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towards them. 
     Maggot  jumped  down  and stood holding the  ponies' heads, and peering 
forward into the gloom. Clip-clop, clip-clop came the approaching rider. The 
fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air. 

####-     'You'd better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,' said  Sam anxiously. 'You get down 
in the waggon and cover up with  blankets, and we'll send this  rider to the 
rightabouts!'  He climbed out  and went to the  farmer's side.  Black Riders 
would have to ride over him to get near the waggon. 
     Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was nearly on them. 
     'Hallo there!' called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped short.  
They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in the mist, a yard 
or two ahead. 'Now then!'  said the  farmer, throwing the  reins to  Sam and 
striding forward. 'Don't you come a step nearer! What do you want, and where 
are you going?' 
     'I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?' sa id a muffled voice - but the 
voice was  the voice of Merry Brandybuck.  A dark lantern was uncovered, and 
its light fell on the astonished face of the farmer. 
     'Mr. Merry!' he cried. 
     'Yes, of course! Who  did you think it was?' said Merry coming forward.  
As  he came out of the mist and their fears subsided, he seemed suddenly  to 
diminish to  ordinary  hobbit-size. He was  riding a pony, and a  scarf  was 
swathed round his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog. 
     Frodo  sprang  out of  the waggon to greet  him. 'So  there you are  at 
last!'  said Merry.  'I was beginning to wonder if you would  turn up at all 
today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew foggy I came across 
and rode up  towards Stock to see if you had fallen in  any ditches. But I'm 
blest  if  I  know  which way  you  have come. Where did you  find them, Mr. 
Maggot? In your duck-pond?' 
     'No,  I  caught 'em trespassing,'  said the farmer, 'and nearly set  my 
dogs on  'em;  but they'll tell  you all the story,  I 've no doubt.  Now, if 
you'll excuse  me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and  all, I'd best be turning for  
home. Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick.' 
     He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. 'Well, good  night to 
you all,' he said. 'It's been a queer day, and no mistake. But all's well as 
ends well; though perhaps  we should not say  that  until  we reach  our own 
doors. I'll not deny that I'll be glad now when I  do.' He lit his lanterns,  
and got up.  Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat.  'I was 
nearly forgetting,' he said. 'Mrs. Maggot put this up  for Mr. Baggins, with 
her compliments.'  He handed  it down and moved off, followed by a chorus of 
thanks and good-nights. 
     They  watched  the  pale  rings  of  light  round his lanterns as  they 

####-dwindled  into  the  foggy night. Suddenly  Frodo laughed: from the  covered 
basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising. 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. A Conspiracy Unmasked 

 
 
     'Now we had  better get home  ourselves,' said  Merry. There's something 
funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.' 
     They turned down  the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept  and  
edged with  large white-washed stones. In a hundred yards  or so  it brought  
them to  the  river -bank,  where there was a broad wooden  landing-stage.  A 
large  flat  ferry-boat was  moored beside it.  The white  bollards near the 
water's edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on high posts. Behind  them 
the mists in the flat fields were now above the hedges; but the water before 
them was dark,  with only  a few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by 
the bank. There seemed to be less fog on the further side. 
     Merry  led the pony  over a gangway  on to  the ferry,  and the  others 
followed.  Merry  then  pushed slowly off with  a  long pole. The Brandywine 
flowed slow and broad before them. On the other side the bank was steep, and 
up it a  winding path climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinkling 
there. Behind loomed  up the Buck Hill; and out of it, through stray shrouds 
of mist, shone many  round windows, yellow and red. They were the windows 
of 
Brandy Hall, the ancient home of the Brandybucks.  
     Long  ago Gorhendad Oldbuck,  head of the  Oldbuck family,  one of  the 
oldest  in  the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed  the river, which 
was the original  boundary of  the land  eastwards. He built (and excavated)  
Brandy  Hall, changed his name to Brandybuck,  and settled  down  to  become 
master of  what was virtually  a small independent country. His  family grew 
and grew,  and after his days  continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied 
the whole of the low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors,  
and about a hundred windows. The  Brandybucks and  their numerous 
dependants 
then  began  to burrow, and later to  build,  all round about. That was  the 
origin  of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old 
Forest, a sort  of colony from the Shire. Its  chief village was Bucklebury, 
clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall. 
     The people in the Marish were  friendly with the Bucklanders,  and  the 
authority of the Master  of the  Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck  family 

####-was called) was still acknowledged by the farmers between Stock  and Rushey. 
But  most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar, 
half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter  of fact, they were not very 
different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point: 
they were fond of boats, and some of them could swim. 
     Their land  was originally unprotected from the East; but on  that side 
they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been  planted many  generations 
ago, and was now thick and  tail, for it  was constantly tended. It  ran all 
the  way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop  curving away from the river, 
to  Haysend  (where  the  Withywindle flowed  out  of  the Forest  into  the 
Brandywine): well over twenty miles from end to  end. But, of course,  it was 
not  a complete  protection.  The Forest  drew  close  to the hedge in  many 
places.  The Bucklanders kept their doors locked after  dark,  and that also 
was not usual in the Shire. 
     The  ferry-boat moved slowly  across the water. The Buckland shore drew 
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river  
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his 
old life lay behind  in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched 
his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone 
on living quietly at Bag End. 
     The four  hobbits stepped off the ferry.  Merry was  tying  it up,  and 
Pippin  was already leading  the pony up the  path, when Sam  (who had  been 
looking ba ck, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper: 
     'Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?' 
     On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just  make  out a  
figure: it looked like a  dark black bundle left behind. But a s they  looked 
it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It  
then crawled, or went crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps.  
     'What in the Shire is that?' exclaimed Merry. 
     'Something that is following us,' said Frodo. 'But don't ask  any  more 
now!  Let's get away  at once!' They hurried up the path to the top  of  the 
bank,  but when  they  looked  back  the far shore was shrouded in mist, and 
nothing could be seen. 
     'Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west -bank!' said Frodo.  
'Can horses cross the river?' 
     'They  can go twenty miles north to Brandywine  Bridge - or they  might 
swim,'  answered  Merry. 'Though  I  never heard of any horse  swimming  the 

####-Brandywine. But what have  horses to do with it?' I'll tell you later. Let's 
get indoors and then we can talk.' 
     'All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I'll just ride on and tell 
Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We'll see about supper and things.' 
     'We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,' said Frodo;  'but we could 
do with another.' 
     'You shall have it! Give  me that basket!' said  Merry, and  rode ahead 
into the darkness.  
     It  was some distance from  the  Brandywine  to  Frodo's new  house  at 
Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the 
outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland that ran south from 
the Bridge. Half a mile northward  along this they came to a lane opening on  
their  right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it  climbed up and 
down into the country. 
     At last  they  came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could be 
seen  of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the middle of 
a wide  circle of  lawn surrounded by  a belt of  low trees inside the outer  
hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an  out-of-the-way corner of 
the country, and there were  no other dwellings close  by.  You could get in 
and out  without being noticed. It had been built a long while before by the 
Brandybucks, for the use  of guests, or members of the family that wished to 
escape  from  the  crowded  life  of  Brandy  Hall  for a  time.  It  was an 
old-fashioned  countrified house, as much like a hobbit -hole as possible: it 
was long and low,  with no  upper storey; and it had a roof  of  turf, round 
windows, and a large round door. 
     As they walked lip the green path  from  the gate no light was visible; 
the  windows  were dark and shuttered.  Frodo knocked on the door, and Fatty 
Bolger opened it . A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and 
shut themselves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on 
either side; in  front  of them a  passage ran back  down the  middle of the 
house. 
     'Well, what do you think of it?' asked Merry coming up the passage. 'We 
have  done our  best in  a short time to make it  look  like home. After all 
Fatty and I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.' 
     Frodo looked  round.  It did  look like home. Many of his own favourite 
things -  or Bilbo's things (they  reminded  him sharply of him in their new 
selling) - were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been  at Bag End. 

####-It  was  a  pleasant,  comfortable,  welcoming  place;  and he found himself 
wishing  that he was really coming  here to settle down in quiet retirement. 
It  seemed unfair  to have put his friends  to  all  this  trouble;  and  he 
wondered again how he was going to break the news to them that he must leave 
them so soon, indeed at  once. Yet that  would  have  to be  done  that very 
night, before they all went to bed. 
     'It's delightful!' he said with an effort. 'I  hardly feel that I  have 
moved at all.' 
     The  travellers hung  up their  cloaks,  and piled  their packs  on the 
floor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at the far end. 
Firelight came out, and a puff of steam. 
     'A bath!' cried Pippin. 'O blessed Meriadoc!' 
     'Which order  shall we  go in?' said Frodo. 'Eldest  first, or quickest 
first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.' 
     'Trust me to arrange things  better than that!'  said Merry.  'We can't 
begin life  at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room there are 
three tubs, and  a copper full of boiling water. There are also towels, mats 
and soap. Get inside, and be quick!' 
     Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage, 
and  busied  themselves  with  the  final  preparations  for  a late supper. 
Snatches of competing songs came  from the bathroom mixed  with the sound 
of 
splashing and wallowing.  The voice of Pippin was  suddenly lifted up  above 
the others in one of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs. 
     Sing hey! for the bath at close of day 
     that washes the weary mud away! 
     A loon is he that will not sing: 
     O! Water Hot is a noble thing! 
 
     O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain, 
     and the brook that leaps from hill to plain; 
     but better than rain or rippling streams 
     is Water Hot that smokes and steams. 
 
     O! Water cold we may pour at need 
     down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed; 
     but better is Beer, if drink we lack, 

####-     and Water Hot poured down the back. 
 
     O! Water is fair that leaps on high 
     in a fountain white beneath the sky; 
     but never did fountain sound so sweet 
     as splashing Hot Water with my feet! 
     There  was a terrific  splash, and  a  shout  of  Whoa! from  Frodo. It 
appeared that a lot of Pippin's  bath had imitated a fountain and leaped  on 
high. 
     Merry went  to the door: 'What about supper a nd beer in the throat?' he 
called. Frodo came out drying his hair. 
     'There's so much  water  in the air that I'm coming into the kitchen to 
finish,' he said. 
     'Lawks!' said Merry, looking  in. The  stone floor  was swimming.  'You  
ought to mop all that up before you get anything to eat. Peregrin,' he said. 
'Hurry up, or we shan't wait for you.' 
     They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. 'I suppose you  
three won't want mushrooms again?' said Fredegar without much hope. 
     'Yes we shall!' cried Pippin. 
     'They're mine!'  said Frodo. 'Given to me  by Mrs. Maggot, a queen among 
farmers' wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I'll serve them.' 
     Hobbits have a passion  for mushrooms,  surpassing  even  the greediest  
likings  of Big  People.  A  fact  which  partly explains young Frodo's long 
expeditions  to  the renowned fields of the Marish,  and the  wrath  of  the 
injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to 
hobbit standards. There were also many other things to follow, and when they 
had  finished even Fatty Bolger heaved  a sigh  of content. They pushed back 
the table, and drew chairs round the fire. 
     'We'll clear up later,' said Merry. 'Now tell me all  about it! I guess 
that you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair without me. I 
want a full account; and most of all I want to know what was the matter with 
old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he was 
scared, if that is possible.' 
     'We  have all been  scared,' said Pippin after a pause,  in which Frodo 
stared at the fire and did not speak. 'You would have been,  too, if you had 
been chased for two days by Black Riders.' 
     'And what are they?' 

####-     'Black figures  riding  on black horses,'  answered Pippin.  'If  Frodo 
won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.' He then gave 
a  full account of their journey from the time  when they left Hobbiton. Sam 
gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent. 
     'I should  think you were making it all up,'  said Merry, 'if I had not 
seen  that black shape on  the landing-stage - and heard the queer  sound in 
Maggot's voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?' 
     'Cousin Frodo has been very close,' said Pippin. 'But the time has come 
for  him to open  out. So far we have been given nothing  more to go on than 
Farmer  Maggot's  guess  that  it  has  something  to  do  with  old Bilbo's 
treasure.' 
     'That  was  only  a  guess,' said Frodo hastily. 'Maggot does  not know 
anything.' 
     'Old Maggot is  a shrewd fellow,' said Merry. 'A lot goes on behind his 
round face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to go 
into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation of knowing a good 
many  strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think  
his guess good or bad.' 
     'I think,'  answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as  far as 
it  goes. There is a  connexion with Bilbo's  old adventures,  and the Riders 
are looking,  or perhaps one  ought to say  searching,  for him or for me. I 
also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not 
safe here or anywhere else.' He looked round at the windows and walls, as if 
he was afraid  they would  su ddenly give  way.  The others looked at him  in 
silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves. 
     'It's coming out in a minute,' whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry nodded. 
     'Well!' said Frodo at  last, sitting  up and straightening his back, as 
if he had made  a  decision.  'I can't keep it dark any  longer.  I have got 
something to tell you all. But I don't know quite how to begin.' 
     'I think I could help you,' said Merry quietly, 'by telling you some of 
it myself.' 
     'What do you mean?' said  Frodo, looking  at him anxiously. 'Just this, 
my  dear old  Frodo: you  are miserable, because you don't know how  to  say 
good-bye.  You  meant to leave the Shire, of course. But danger has come  on 
you sooner  than you expected, and now you are  making up your mind to go at 
once. And you don't want to. We are very sorry for you.' 
     Frodo opened his mouth  and shut it again. His  look of surprise was so 

####-comical that they laughed. 'Dear  old  Frodo!' said Pippin.  'Did you really 
think you had thrown dust in  all our eyes? You have not been nearly careful 
or clever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying 
farewell  to  all your haunts all this  year since April. We have constantly 
heard you  muttering:  "Shall  I  ever   look  down into that valley again, I 
wonder",  and things like that.  And pretending that you had come to the end  
of  your  money,  and  actually  selling  your  beloved  Bag  End  to  those 
Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.' 
     'Good  heavens!'  said Frodo. 'I thought  I had been  both  careful and 
clever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all  the Shire discussing my  
departure then?' 
     'Oh no!' said Merry. 'Don't worry about that! The secret won't keep for  
long,  of  course;  but  at  present it  is,  I  think,  only  known  to  us 
conspirators. After  all, you must remember  that we know you  well, and are 
often with  you.  We can usually guess what you are thinking. I  knew Bilbo,  
too. To  tell you the truth,  I had been watching you  rather  closely  ever  
since he  left. I thought you would go  after him sooner or  later; indeed I 
expected you  to go sooner, and lately we have  been very  anxious.  We have 
been terrified that you might give us the slip, and go off suddenly,  all on 
your own like he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and  
done a good deal of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape 
so easily!' 
     'But I must go,' said Frodo. 'It cannot be helped, dear friends. It  is 
wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since you have 
guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!' 
     'You  do not understand!' said Pippin. 'You  must go  - and therefore we 
must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an excellent fellow,  and 
would jump down a dragon's throat to  save you, if he did not trip over  his 
own feet; but  you  will  need  more than one  companion in  your  dangerous 
adventure.' 
     'My dear  and  most beloved hobbits!'  said Frodo deeply  moved. 'But I 
could not  allow it. I decided that  long ago, too. You speak of danger, but 
you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt,  no there-and -back journey.  
I am flying from deadly peril into deadly peril.' 
     'Of course  we understand,'  said Merry  firmly.  'That is why we  have 
decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing-matter; but we are going to 
do our best to help you against the Enemy.' 

####-     'The Ring!' said Frodo, now completely amazed. 
     'Yes, the Ring,' said  Merry. 'My dear old hobbit, you don't  allow for  
the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence of the Ring 
for years  - before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded 
it  as  secret,  I  kept  the  knowledge  in  my  head, until we formed  our 
conspiracy. I  did not know Bilbo, of course, as  well as I know you; I  was 
too young, and he was also more careful  - but  he was not careful enough. If 
you want to know how I first found out, I will tell you.' 
     'Go on!' said Frodo faintly. 
     'It was  the  Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall,  as you might 
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along the  
road, when I  saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared, 
coming towards us.  Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he  vanished.  I 
was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary 
fashion; but  I got through the hedge and walked along the  field inside.  I 
was  peeping  through into the road,  after the S.-B.s  had  passed, and was 
looking  straight at Bilbo  when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of 
gold as he put something back in his trouser -pocket. 
     'After that I kept my  eyes open.  In fact, I confess that I spied. But 
you must  admit that it was very  intriguing, and I was only in my teens.  I 
must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the 
old fellow's secret book.' 
     'You have read his book!' cried Frodo.  'Good heavens above! Is nothing 
safe?' 
     'Not  too safe, I should say,' said  Merry.  'But  I have  only had one 
rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I 
wonder what became  of it. I should  like  another look.  Have you  got  it, 
Frodo?' 
     'No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.' 
     'Well, as  I  was saying,' Merry  proceeded, 'I  kept my  knowledge  to 
myself,  till  this Spring  when  things got  serious. Then  we  formed  our 
conspiracy;  and  as we were serious, too,  and meant business,  we have not  
been too scrupulous. You are  not a very easy  nut to crack,  and Gandalf is 
worse. But if  you want to be  introduced  to our chief investigator, I  can 
produce him.' 
     'Where is  he?' said  Frodo, looking round, as if he  expected a masked 
and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard. 

####-     'Step forward, Sam!'  said Merry; and  Sam stood up with a face scarlet 
up to  the ears.  'Here's our collector of  information! And he  collected a  
lot, I  can tell you, before he was finally  caught. After which, I may say, 
he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and dried up.' 
     'Sam!' cried  Frodo,  feeling that amazement could  go no  further, and 
quite  unable  to decide whether he felt angry,  amused, relieved, or merely 
foolish. 
     'Yes, sir!' said Sam.  'Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant  no wrong 
to you, Mr.  Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf  for that matter. He  has some sense, 
mind you; and when you  said  go alone, he  said no! lake someone as you can 
trust.' 
     'But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,' said Frodo.  Sam looked 
at him unhappily.  'It all depends on what you want,' put in Merry. 'You can 
trust us to stick to you through thick and thin - to the bitter end. And you  
can trust us to keep any secret of yours  - closer than you keep it yourself.  
But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off  without a  
word. We  are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what 
Gandalf has  told you. We know  a good deal about the Ring. We  are horribly 
afraid - but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.' 
     'And after all, sir,'  added Sam,  'you did  ought to  take the  Elves' 
advice.  Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you can't deny 
it.' 
     'I don't deny it,' said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. 'I 
don't  deny it, but I'll never believe you  are  sleeping again, whether you  
snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure. 
     'You are a set  of deceitful  scoundrels!'  he  said,  turning  to  the 
others.  'But bless you!' he laughed, getting up and waving his arms, 'I give 
in. I will take Gildor's  advice.  If the danger were not  so dark, I should 
dance for joy. Even so,  I cannot  help feeling  happy; happier than I  have 
felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.' 
     'Good!  That's  settled. Three cheers  for  Captain Frodo and company!' 
they shouted;  and  they  danced round him. Merry and  Pippin  began a song, 
which they had apparently got ready for the occasion. 
     It was made on  the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo  on  his 
adventure long ago, and went to the same tune: 
     Farewell we call to hearth and hall! 
     Though wind may blow and rain may fall, 

####-     We must away ere break of day 
     Far over wood and mountain tall. 
 
     To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell 
     In glades beneath the misty fell, 
     Through moor and waste we ride in haste, 
     And whither then we cannot tell. 
 
     With foes ahead, behind us dread, 
     Beneath the sky shall be our bed, 
     Until at last our toil be passed, 
     Our journey done, our errand sped. 
 
     We must away! We must away! 
     We ride before the break of day! 
     'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things to 
do before we go to bed - under a roof, for  tonight at any rate.' 
     'Oh! That was poetry!' said Pippin. 'Do you really mean to start before 
the break of day?' 
     'I don't know,' answered  Frodo. 'I fear those  Black Riders, and  I am 
sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in  a place to which 
it is known  I was going. Also Gildor advised me  not to wait. But I  should 
very  much like  to see  Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed 
when  he heard that Gandalf  had never  appeared. It really  depends  on two 
things.  How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how  soon could 
we 
get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.' 
     'The answer to the  second question,' said Merry, 'is that we could get 
off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies 
in a stable across the fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except  for  
a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.' 
     'It seems to have been  a  very efficient conspiracy,' said Frodo. 'But 
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?' 
     'That all depends on  what you think the Riders would do, if they found 
you here,' answered Merry. 'They could  have reached here  by now, of course, 
if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the 
river -bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let them 

####-through by night, though they might break through. Even in the daylight they 
would try  to keep them out, I think, at any  rate until  they got a message 
through to the Master of the Hall  - for they would not like the  look of the 
Riders, and would certainly be  frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland 
cannot resist a determined attack for  long. And it  is possible that in the 
morning even a Black Rider that rode  up  and asked for Mr. Baggins would be 
let through. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back  to  live 
at Crickhollow.' 
     Frodo  sat for  a while in thought. 'I have made  up  my mind,' he said 
finally. 'I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not going 
by road: it  would be safer  to  wait here than  that.  If  I go through the 
North-gate my departure from  Buckland  will  be  known at once, instead  of 
being secret for  several days at least,  as it might be. And  what is more, 
the Bridge and the  East Road  near the  borders  will certainly be watched, 
whether  any Rider gets into  Buckland or not. We don't know  how many there 
are; but there are at least  two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is 
to go off in a qu ite unexpected direction.' 
     'But that  can only mean going  into  the  Old  Forest!'  said Fredegar 
horrified. 'You can't be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous as 
Black Riders.' 
     'Not quite,' said Merry. It sounds very  desperate, but I believe Frodo 
is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed  at once. 
With luck we might gel a considerable start.' 
     'But you won't have any luck in the Old Forest,' objected Fredegar. 'No 
one ever has luck in there. You'll gel lost. People don't go in there.' 
     'Oh yes they  do!'  said  Merry. 'The Brandybucks go in   - occasionally 
when the fit takes  them. We have  a  private entrance. Frodo  went in once, 
long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when 
the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.' 
     'Well, do  as you think best!' said Fredegar. 'I am more afraid of  the 
Old  Forest  than of anything I  know about:  the  stories  about  it  are a  
nightmare; but  my  vote hardly counts,  as I am  not going on the  journey. 
Still, I am very glad  someone is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what 
you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.' 
     Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire, 
nor to see what lay  outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, from 
Budgeford in Bridgefields in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine 

####-Bridge.  His task, according to the original plans  of the conspirators, was 
to stay  behind and deal with inquisitive folk,  and  to keep up as long  as 
possible the  pretence that Mr. Baggins  was still living at Crickhollow. He 
had even brought along some old clothes of  Frodo's to help  him  in playing  
the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove. 
     'Excellent!' said Frodo,  when he understood the  plan. 'We  could  not  
have  left  any  message behind for Gandalf otherwise.  I don't know whether 
these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk  
a written message, in case they got in and  searched the house. But if Fatty 
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we 
have gone, that  decides me. I am going  into  the Old  Forest  first  thing 
tomorrow.' 
     'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have our 
job than Fatty's - waiting here till Black Riders come.' 
     'You wait till you are well inside  the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'll 
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.' 
     'It's no  good arguing about it any more,' said Merry.  'We have  still 
got  to tidy up and put the finishing touches to  the packing, before we get 
to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.' 
     When at last he  had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for  some  time. 
His  legs ached. He. was  glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually 
he fell into a  vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking  out of a high 
window over  a dark  sea of tangled trees.  Down below among the roots there 
was the sound of creatures  crawling and snuffling.  He felt sure they would  
smell him out sooner or later. 
     Then  he heard a noise in the distance.  At first he thought  it  was a  
great wind  coming over the leaves of the forest. Then  he knew  that it was 
not leaves, but the sound of the  Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in 
waking life, though it  had often  troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he 
was out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on  a dark heath, 
and there was a strange salt smell in  the air. Looking up he saw before him 
a tall white tower, standing alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over  
him to climb the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle  up the ridge 
towards the  tower:  but  suddenly a light came in  the sky, and there was a  
noise of thunder. 
 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 6.</h4> <br> The Old Forest 

 
 
     Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in  the room. Merry was standing 
there with a candle  in one hand, and banging  on the  door with the  other. 
'All right! What is it?' said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered. 
     'What is it!' cried Merry. 'It is  time to get up. It is half past four 
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready. Even Pippin 
is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch the one that is to be 
the  baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up  and  
see us off.' 
     Soon after  six o'clock the  five  hobbits were  ready  to start. Fatty 
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry went in 
front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path that  went through 
a spinney behind  the house, and then  cut across several fields. The leaves 
of  trees were  glistening, and every twig  was dripping; the grass was grey 
with  cold dew. Everything was  still,  and far-away  noises seemed near and 
clear:  fowls chattering  in a yard,  someone closing a  door of  a  distant 
house. 
     In their shed they found the ponies;  sturdy  little beasts of the kind 
loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for  a long day's work. They mounted, 
and  soon  they  were  riding off  into  the  mist,  which  seemed  to  open 
reluctantly before them and close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for  
about  an  hour,  slowly  and without talking,  they  saw  the Hedge looming  
suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over  with silver cobwebs.  'How  are 
you  going to get  through  this?'  asked Fredegar. 'Follow me!' said Merry, 
'and you will see.' He turned to the  left  along  the Hedge, and  soon they 
came to a point  wher e it bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A 
cutting  had been made, at  some distance from the  Hedge, and  went sloping 
gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at  the sides, which rose 
steadily,  until suddenly  they arched  over a nd formed a  tunnel that dived 
deep under the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side. 
     Here Fatty Bolger halted. 'Good-bye, Frodo!' he  said.  'I wish you were 
not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the 
day is out. But good luck to you - today and every day!' 
     'If there  are no worse things ahead  than  the Old Forest, I  shall be 
lucky,'  said  Frodo. 'Tell Gandalf to hurry along the  East Road: we  shall 

####-soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.'  'Good-bye!' they cried, and 
rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight into the tunnel. 
     It  was  dark and  damp. At the far  end it  was  closed  by  a gate of 
thick -set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when they had 
all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a clang, and the lock  
clicked. The sound was ominous. 
     'There!' said Merry. 'You have left the Shire, and are now outside, and 
on the edge of the Old Forest.' 
     'Are the stories about it true?' asked Pippin. 
     'I don't know what  stories you mean,' Merry answered. 'If you mean the 
old bogey-stories Fatty's nurses  used to tell him, about goblins and wolves 
and things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I  don't believe them. 
But the  Forest is queer. Everything in it  is very  much more  alive,  more 
aware of what is going on, so to  speak, than things  are in the  Shire. And 
the  trees do not like strangers. They watch  you. They  are usually content 
merely to  watch  you,  as  long  a s  daylight  lasts,  and  don't  do much. 
Occasionally the most unfriendly ones may drop a  branch,  or  stick  a root 
out,  or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at  night things  can be most  
alarming,  or so I am  told. I have  only once or twice  been in here  after  
dark, and then only near the hedge. I thought all the  trees were whispering 
to each  other,  passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language; 
and the branches swayed and groped without any wind. They  do  say the trees 
do  actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In  fact long  
ago they  attacked the Hedge: they came and  planted themselves right by it,  
and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and 
made a great  bonfire in the  Forest, and  burned all the  ground in  a long 
strip east of the Hedge. After that the  trees gave up the attack,  but they 
became very unfriendly.  There  is  still a wide  bare  space not far inside 
where the bonfire was made.' 
     'Is it only the trees that are dangerous?' asked Pippin. 
     'There are  various queer things living deep  in the Forest, and on the 
far  side,' said Merry, 'or at least I have heard so; but I have never  seen 
any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever  one comes inside one 
finds 
open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from time  to time in a queer 
fashion.  Not far from  this tunnel there is, or was for  a  long time,  the 
beginning of quite  a broad path leading to the Bonfire  Glade,  and then on 

####-more  or less in our direction, east and a little  north. That is the path I 
am going to try and find.' 
     The hobbits now left the tunnel -gate and rode across  the  wide hollow.  
On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest, a  
hundred yards a nd more beyond  the Hedge;  but it  vanished  as  soon as  it 
brought them under the trees.  Looking back they could see the  dark line of 
the  Hedge  through  the stems of trees  that were already thick about them. 
Looking  ahead  they  could  see  only tree-trunks of innumerable sizes  and  
shapes: straight  or bent,  twisted, leaning,  squat  or slender, smooth  or  
gnarled and branched;  and all the stems were green  or grey with  moss  and  
slimy, shaggy growths.  
     Merry alone  seemed fairly cheerful.  'You had  better lead  on and find 
that path,'  Frodo  said to him.  'Don't  let us lose one another, or forget 
which way the Hedge lies!' 
     They picked a  way  among the trees, and  their  ponies plodded  along, 
carefully  avoiding the many  writhing  and interlacing roots. There  was no 
undergrowth. The ground was  rising  steadily,  and as they went  forward it  
seemed  that the trees became  taller, darker,  and  thicker. There  was  no 
sound,  except  an occasional drip  of  moisture falling  through  the still 
leaves.  For  the  moment  there  was no  whispering  or movement  among the 
branches; but  they  all got  an uncomfortable feeling that they were  being 
watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity.  The feeling 
steadily  grew, until they found  themselves looking up quickly, or glancing 
back over their shoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow.  
     There was not  as  yet  any  sign  of  a path,  and  the  trees  seemed 
constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly  felt that he could not bear it 
any longer, and without warning let out  a shout. 'Oi! Oi!' he  cried. 'I am 
not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will you!' 
     The others halted startled; but the  cry  fell as if muffled by a heavy 
curtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood  seemed to  become 
more 
crowded and more watchful than before. 
     'I should not shout, if I were you,' said Merry. It does more harm than 
good.' 
     Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, a nd if 
he had been right  to make  the others come into this abominable wood. Merry 
was looking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go. 

####-Pippin noticed it. 'It  has not taken you long to lose  us,' he said. But at 
that moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead. 
     'Well, well!'  he  said. 'These trees do  shift.  There is the  Bonfire 
Glade in front of  us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved 
away!' 
     The light grew clearer as they  went forward. Suddenly they came out of 
the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There was sky above 
them, blue and clear to  their surprise, for down under the Forest -roof they 
had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. The 
sun  was  not,  however,  high  enough  yet to shine down into the clearing, 
though its light was on  the  tree-tops. The  leaves  were  all  thicker and 
greener about  the edges of  the  glade, enclosing  it with  an almost solid 
wall. No tree grew there,  only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky  and 
faded hemlocks  and wood-parsley,  fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes,  and 
rampant nettles and  thistles.  A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and 
cheerful garden after the close Forest. 
     The hobbits  felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadening 
daylight in the  sky. At the far side  of the glade there was a break in the 
wall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see it running on into 
the wood, wide  in places  and open  above, though  every  now and again the 
trees drew in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path  they 
rode. They were  still climbing gently, but they now  went much quicker, and 
with better heart;  for it seemed to them that the  Forest had relented, and 
was going to let them pass unhindered after all. 
     But after a while the air began to get  hot and stuffy. The  trees drew 
close again  on either side, and they  could  no longer  see far ahead.  Now 
stronger than ever they  felt again  the ill will  of  the  wood pressing on 
them.  So silent was it that  the fall of their ponies'  hoofs, rustling  on 
dead leaves and  occasionally  stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud  in 
their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank  
to a murmur. 
     O! Wanderers in the shadowed land 
     despair not! For though dark they stand, 
     all woods there be must end at last, 
     and see the open sun go past: 
     the setting sun, the rising sun, 
     the day's end, or the day begun. 

####-     For east or west all woods must fail... 
     Fail - even as he said the word his voice faded  into  silence. The air 
seemed  heavy and the making  of  words wearisome. Just behind them  a large 
branch fell from an  old overhanging tree with  a crash into  the  path. The 
trees seemed to close in before them. 
     'They  do not  like all that about ending and failing,' said  Merry. 'I  
should not sing any  more  at present. Wait till we do  get to the edge, and 
then we'll turn and give them a rousing chorus!' 
     He spoke cheerfully, and if  he felt any great anxiety, he did not show 
it. The  others did not  answer.  They were depressed.  A heavy  weight  was 
settling steadily  on  Frodo's  heart, and he regretted now with every  step 
forward that he had ever thought of challenging the menace  of the trees. He 
was, indeed,  just  about  to stop and propose going back (if that was still 
possible), when  things took  a  new  turn. The  path  stopped climbing, and 
became for a while nearly  level. The dark trees drew aside, and  ahead they 
could see  the path  going  almost  straight forward.  Before them, but some 
distance off, there stood a  green  hill-top, treeless, rising  like a  bald 
head out of the  encircling wood. The  path seemed to be making directly for  
it. 
     They now hurried forward again,  delighted with the thought of climbing 
out  for  a  while above the roof  of the Forest. The path dipped, and  then 
again began  to climb upwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steep 
hillside.  There  it left the trees and faded into the turf.  The wood stood 
all round the hill like  thick  hair that ended sharply in  a circle round a  
shaven crown. 
     The hobbits  led their  ponies up, winding  round and  round until they 
reached the top. There they stood and gazed about them. The air was gleaming 
and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any great distance. Near  at 
hand the mist was now almost gone;  though here and there it lay  in hollows 
of the wood, and to  the south  of  them, out of a deep  fold cutting  right 
across the Forest, the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke. 
     'That,'  said Merry, pointing  with his hand, 'that  is the line of the 
Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and flows south-west through 
the 
midst of the  Forest to join the  Brandywine below Haysend. We don't want to 
go that way! The Withywindle valley is said to be  the  queerest part of the 
whole wood  - the centre from which all the queerness comes, as it were.' 

####-     The others looked in the  direction  that  Merry  pointed out, but they 
could see little but mists over the damp and  deep-cut valley; and beyond it 
the southern half of the Forest faded from view.  
     The sun on the hill-lop was now  getting  hot. It must  have been a bout 
eleven o'clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from seeing much in 
other directions. In the west they could not make out either the line of the 
Hedge  or  the  valley of  the Brandywine  beyond  it. Northward, where they 
looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that might be the line of  the 
great East Road, for which they were making. They were on an island in a sea  
of trees, and the horizon was veiled. 
     On the south-eastern  side  the ground fell very  steeply,  as  if  the 
slopes  of  the  hill   were  continued  far  down  under  the  trees,  like 
island-shores that really  are the  sides  of a mountain rising  out of deep 
waters. They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below them, 
while they ate their  mid-day meal. As  the sun rose  and  passed  noon they 
glimpsed far  off  in  the east the grey-green lines  of the Downs  that lay 
beyond  the Old Forest on that side. That cheered them greatly; for  it  was 
good to see a sight of anything beyond the  wood's border s,  though they did  
not mean to go  that way,  if  they  could help it: the Barrow-downs  had as 
sinister a reputation in hobbit -legend as the Forest itself.  
     At length they made up their minds  to go on again. The path  that  had 
brought them to the hill reappeared on  the northward side; but they had not  
followed it far before they became aware that it was bending steadily to the 
right.  Soon it  began  to descend  rapidly and they  guessed  that  it must 
actually be heading towards the Withywindle va lley: not at all the direction 
they  wished  lo  take. After some  discussion  they decided to  leave  this 
misleading path and strike northward; for although they had not been able to 
see it  from the hill-top, the Road  must lie that way, and it  could not be 
many miles off. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed  
lo  be drier  and more  open,  climbing up to slopes  where  the  trees were 
thinner,  and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes  and other  strange 
and nameless trees  of the denser wood. 
     At first  their  choice  seemed  to  be good: they got along  at a fair 
speed, though whenever they got  a glimpse of the sun  in an open glade they 
seemed  unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But  after a time the  trees 
began to close in again,  just where they had appeared from a distance to be 
thinner and  less tangled. Then  deep  folds  in  the ground were discovered 

####-unexpectedly, like the ruts of great  giant-wheels or  wide moats and sunken 
roads long disused and choked with  brambles. These lay usually right across 
their  line  of march, and could only be crossed  by scrambling down and out 
again, which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each time they 
climbed down they found the  hollow  filled  with  thick bushes  and  matted 
undergrowth, which somehow would not  yield to the  left, but only  gave way 
when they turned to the right; and they  had to go some  distance along  the 
bottom before they could find a  way up  the  further bank.  Each  time they 
clambered out, the trees seemed deeper and  darker;  and always  to the left 
and upwards it was most difficult to find a way, and they were forced to the  
right and downwards.  
     After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction, though 
they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They 
were being headed off,  and were simply following a course chosen for them - 
eastwards and southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it. 
     The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and stumbled  into a  
fold that was  wider and  deeper than any they had yet met. It  was so sleep 
and  overhung that  it proved  impossible  to climb out  of it again, either  
forwards  or  backwards, without  leaving  their ponies  and  their  baggage 
behind. All  they could do  was to  follow  the fold - downwards. The ground 
grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared in the banks, and soon they  
found themselves following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy 
bed. Then the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and 
noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit gully 
over -arched by trees high above them. 
     After stumbling along for some way along  the  stream, they came  quite 
suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight before 
them.  Coming  to the opening they found  that they had  made their way down 
through a cleft in a high sleep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a wide 
space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bank  
almost as  steep. A golden  afternoon  of  late sunshine lay warm and drowsy 
upon  the hidden land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a  dark 
river  of brown  water,  bordered with ancient  willows,  arched  over  with 
willows, blocked  with fallen willows,  and flecked with thousands  of faded 
willow-leaves.  The  air was thick  with  them, fluttering  yellow from  the 
branches;  for there  was a  warm  and gentle breeze blowing  softly   in the  
valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking. 

####-     'Well, now I have at  least some  notion  of where we are!' said Merry. 
'We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is 
the River Withywindle! I will go on and explore.' 
     He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the  long grasses.  
After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground 
between the cliff-foot and the river; in  some places firm turf went down to 
the water's edge. 'What's more,' he  said, 'there seems to be something like 
a footpath  winding  along on  this side  of the river. If  we turn left and 
follow it, we  shall be bound to  come out on the  east side of  the  Forest 
eventually.' 
     'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That  is, if the  track goes on so far, and 
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there.  Who made  the track, 
do you suppose, and why?  I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting  
very suspicious  of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe 
all  the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we  should  
have to go?' 
     'No,' said Merry, 'I  haven't. I don't  know in the  least how far down 
the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to 
make 
a path along it. But there is no other way out that I can see or think of.' 
     There being nothing  else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to 
the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and  grasses were lush 
and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easy 
to  follow, as it  turned  and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among 
the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed  over other rills, running down 
gullies into the Wi thywindle  out of the higher  forest -lands,  and at these 
points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.  
     The  hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies  of all 
kinds buzzing round their  ears, and the afternoon sun was burning  on their 
backs.  At last they  came suddenly into a thin shade;  great grey  branches 
reached across  the  path. Each step forward became more  reluctant than the 
last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their  legs, 
and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes. 
     Frodo  felt his  chin go down and  his head nod. Just in front  of  him 
Pippin fell forward on to his knees.  Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard 
Merry saying. 'Can't go another step  without rest. Must have nap. It's cool 
under the willows. Less flies!' 

####-     Frodo did not like the sound of this. 'Come  on!' he  cried. 'We  can't  
have a  nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.' But the others were 
too far gone to care. Besi de them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.  
     Suddenly  Frodo  himself  felt  sleep overwhelming him.  His head swam. 
There now seemed  hardly a sound  in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing. 
Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing,  a soft  fluttering as of a song 
half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes 
and  saw leaning over him a  huge willow-tree,  old  and hoary. Enormous  it  
looked,  its  sprawling  branches  going  up like  reaching  arms with  many 
long-fingered hands,  its knotted and twisted trunk gaping  in wide fissures 
that creaked faintly as the boughs  moved. The leaves fluttering against the 
bright sky dazzled  him,  and he toppled over, lying where  he fell upon the 
grass. 
     Merry and Pippin dragged themselves  forward  and  lay down  with their  
backs to  the willow-trunk.  Behind them  the  great  cracks gaped  wide  to 
receive them as the  tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and 
yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their 
eyes, and  then it seemed  that  they  could almost hear words,  cool words,  
saying something about water and sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell 
and fell fast asleep at the foot of the great grey willow. 
     Frodo   lay for  a while  fighting with  the sleep that was overpowering 
him;  then  with  an  effort  he  struggled  to  his feel again. He  felt  a  
compelling  desire for cool water.  'Wait for me,  Sam,' he  stammered.  'Must  
bathe feet a minute.' 
     Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward  side of the tree, 
where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like  gnarled  dragonets 
straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feel 
in the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his back  
against the tree. 
     Sam sat down and  scratched his head, and yawned like a  cavern. He was 
worried.  The  afternoon  was  getting late,  and  he  thought  this  sudden 
sleepiness  uncanny.  'There's more  behind this than sun and warm air,'  he 
muttered  to himself.  'I don't like this great big tree. I  don't trust it. 
Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won't do at all!' 
     He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had become 
of the ponies. He found that  two had wandered on a good way along the path; 
and he had just  caught them and brought them back towards the others,  when 

####-he  heard two noises; one loud, and the other  soft but very  clear. One was 
the  splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise 
like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast. 
     He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was  in the water close to the  edge, 
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was 
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the  jacket, and dragged him  from  under 
the root; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once 
he woke, and coughed and spluttered. 
     'Do you know, Sam,' he said at length, 'the beastly tree  threw me in! I 
felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!' 
     'You were dreaming  I expect, Mr. Frodo,'  said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit 
in such a place, if you feel sleepy.' 
     'What  about the  others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder  what sort of  dr eams 
they are having.' 
     They went round to the other side of the tree, and  then Sam understood 
the click that he had heard. Pippin  had vanished. The crack by which he had 
laid himself had closed together, so that  not  a chink could be seen. Merry 
was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside, 
but the  rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of  which  gripped 
like a pair of pincers.  
     Frodo and  Sam beat  first upon the  tree-trunk where Pippin had  lain. 
They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held 
poor Merry. It was quite useless.  
     'What a  foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo  wildly. 'Why  did  we ever  
come into this dreadful  Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow! ' He 
kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless  of  his own  feet. A hardly 
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves 
rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter. 
     'I suppose we haven't  got an  axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?' asked 
Sam. 
     'I  brought a  little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'That 
wouldn't be much use.' 
     'Wait a minute!'  cried  Sam, struck by an idea suggested by  firewood. 
'We might do something with fire!' 
     'We might,' said Frodo doubtfully. 'We might succeed in roasting Pippin 
alive inside.' 
 

####- 
     'We might try  to hurt or  frighten  this tree to begin with,' said Sam 
fiercely. 'If it don't let them go,  I'll  have it down,  if  I have to gnaw 
it.' He  ran to the ponies and before  long  came back with two tinder -boxes 
and a hatchet. 
     Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits  of bark; and made 
a  pile  of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These  they heaped against  the 
trunk  on the far side of the tree from  the prisoners. As soon  as Sam  had 
struck  a spark into  the tinder,  it kindled the dry grass  and a flurry of 
flame and smoke went up. The  twigs crackled. Little fingers  of fire licked 
against  the dry scored rind of  the ancient tree and scorched  it. A tremor  
ran through the whole  willow. The leaves  seemed to hiss above their  heads 
with a sound of pain and anger. A loud  scream came from Merry, and from far 
inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell. 
     'Put it out! Put it out!' cried Merry. 'He'll squeeze me in two, if you  
don't. He says so!' 
     'Who?  What?' shouted Frodo,  rushing  round  to  the other side of the 
tree. 
     'Put  it out! Put it  out!'  begged Merry.  The  branches of the wi llow 
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading 
outwards  to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though they 
had  dropped a stone into the quiet slumber  of the river -valley and  set up 
ripples  of anger that  ran out  over the  whole  Forest. Sam kicked at  the 
little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of 
why he did so, or what he hoped  for, ran  along the path crying help! help! 
help! It seemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill 
voice: it  was  blown away  from  him by  the willow-wind and drowned  in  a  
clamour of leaves,  as soon as the  words left his mouth. He felt desperate: 
lost and witless.  
     Suddenly  he  slopped.  There was an answer, or  so  he  thought; but it 
seemed  to come from  behind him, away down  the  path  further back in  the 
Forest.  He turned round and listened, and soon  there  could  be no  doubt: 
someone was  singing a song; a deep glad voice  was  singing  carelessly and 
happily, but it was singing nonsense: 
     Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo! 
     Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow! 
     Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo! 

####-     Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both 
stood still. Suddenly  out of  a long string of  nonsense-words (or so  they 
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song: 
     Hey! Come merry dot! derry dol! My darling! 
     Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling. 
     Down  along under Hill, shining in the sunlight, 
     Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight, 
     There my pretty lady is. River-woman's daughter, 
     Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water. 
     Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing 
     Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing? 
     Hey! Come merry dol! deny dol! and merry-o, 
     Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o! 
     Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away! 
     Tom's in a hurry now. Evening will follow day. 
     Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing. 
     Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?  
     Frodo  and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed  out. The  leaves 
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was  another burst of song, and 
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there  appeared above the 
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in 
the band. With another hop and a bound there came into  view a man, or so it 
seemed.  At any rate he wa s  too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not  quite 
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for  one, 
slumping along with  great yellow  boots on  his  thick legs,  and  charging 
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to  drink. He had a blue coat 
and a long brown beard; his eyes  were blue and bright, and his face was red 
as  a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred  wrinkles of laughter.  In  his 
hands  he carried  on a  large  leaf  as  on a tray  a  small pile  of white 
water -lilies.  
     'Help!' cried  Frodo  and  Sam  running  towards  him with their  hands 
stretched out. 
     'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!' cried the old man, holding up one hand, and 
they  stopped  short, as  if  they  had been  struck stiff. 'Now,  my little 
fellows, where be you a -going to, puffing like a  bellows? What's the matter  
here  then?  Do  you  know who I am? I'm  Tom Bombadil.  Tell me what's 
your 

####-trouble! Tom's in a hurry now. Don't you crush my lilies!' 
     'My friends are caught in the willow-tree,' cried Frodo breathlessly. 
     'Master Merry's being squeezed in a crack!' cried Sam. 
     'What?' shouted Tom Bombadil,  leaping up  in the air. 'Old Man Willow? 
Naught  worse than that, eh? That  can soon  be mended. I know the  tune for 
him.  Old  grey Willow-man! I'll freeze his  marrow cold, if he don't behave 
himself. I'll  sing his roots off. I'll sing a  wind up  and blow  leaf  and 
branch  away.  Old Man  Willow!' Setting down his  lilies carefully  on  the 
grass, he  ran to  the tree. There he saw Merry's feet  still sticking out  - 
the rest had already  been  drawn further inside. Tom  put his mouth to  the 
crack  and  began singing  into it in a  low voice. They could not catch the 
words, but  evidently Merry was aroused. His legs began to kick.  Tom sprang 
away,  and breaking off a hanging branch smote  the side of the  willow with  
it. 'You  let  them  out  again, Old  Man Willow!'  he  said. 'What  be  you  
a-thinking  of? You  should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig deep! Drink water! 
Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!' He then seized  Merry's feet and drew him 
out of the suddenly widening crack. 
     There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of it 
Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then  with  a loud snap both cracks 
closed fast again.  A shudder ran  through  the tree  from root to  tip, and 
complete silence fell. 
     'Thank you!' said the hobbits, one after the other. 
     Tom Bombadil burst out  laughing.  'Well,  my little fellows!' said he, 
stooping  so that he peered into their  faces. 'You shall come home with me!  
The  table is  all laden with  yellow cream, honeycomb, and white bread  and 
butter. Goldberry is  waiting. Time  enough  for questions around the supper  
table. You follow after me as quick as you are able!' With that he picked up 
his  lilies, and then with a beckoning  wave  of  his hand  went hopping and 
dancing along the path eastward, still singing loudly and nonsensically. 
     Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed  a fter him 
as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon disappeared in 
front  of them,  and the noise of his singing got fainter  and further away. 
Suddenly his voice came floating back to them in a loud halloo!  
     Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle! 
     Tom's going on ahead candles for to kindle. 
     Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping. 
     When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open, 

####-     Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.  
     Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow! 
     Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you. 
     Hey now! merry dot! We'll be waiting for you! 
     After that the hobbits heard  no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to 
sink  into  the  trees  behind them. They thought of the slanting  light  of 
evening glittering on the  Brandywine River, and  the windows  of Bucklebury 
beginning  to gleam with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them; 
trunks and branches of trees hung  dark and threatening over the path. White  
mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the 
roots  of the trees upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a  
shadowy steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk. 
     It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their 
legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on 
either  side of them; and if  they looked  up  to the pale sky,  they caught 
sight  of  queer  gnarled  and knobbly  faces that gloomed dark against  the 
twilight,  and leered down at them  from the high bank and the edges of  the 
wood. They  began to feel that  all this  country was unreal,  and that they 
were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening. 
     Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed 
that the  ground  was  gently  rising.  The  water  began to murmur. In  the 
darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the  river flowed over  
a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left  
behind. They  stepped out from the  Forest, and found a wide sweep  of grass 
welling up before them. The  river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily 
down to meet them, glinting here and there in the light of the stars,  which 
were already shining in the sky. 
     The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown 
or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge. 
The path was now plain before  them, well-tended and bordered with stone. It 
wound  up on to the top  of a grassy knoll,  now grey under  the pale starry 
night; and there,  still high  above them  on a further slope, they saw  the 
twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up aga in, up 
a  long smooth  hillside of  turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow 
beam  flowed out  brightly  from a  door  that  was  opened.  There  was Tom 
Bombadil's  house  before them, up,  down,  under hill. Behind  it  a  steep 
shoulder of the land  lay grey and bare,  and beyond that the dark shapes of 

####-the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night. 
     They  all hurried  forward,  hobbits  and  ponies. Already  half  their 
weariness  and all their fears  had fallen from them. Hey! Come  merry  dol! 
rolled out the song to greet them. 
     Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties! 
     Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties. 
     Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together! 
     Then  another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like  the 
song of a glad water flowing  down  into  the night from a bright morning in 
the hills, came falling like silver to meet them: 
     Now let the song begin! Let us sing together 
     Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather, 
     Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather, 
     Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather, 
     Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water: 
     Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter! 
     And  with that song the hobbits stood upon  the threshold, and a golden 
light was all about them. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. In the House of Tom Bombadil 

 
 
     The four hobbits stepped  over the  wide  stone  threshold,  and  stood 
still,  blinking. They  were in a  long  low room,  filled with the light of 
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished 
wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly. 
     In a  chair, at the far side of the room  facing  the outer door, sat a  
woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders;  her  gown was 
green, 
green as young reeds, shot  with silver like beads  of dew; and her belt was 
of gold, shaped like a chain  of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue  eyes of 
forget-me-nots.  About  her  feel  in  wide   vessels  of  green  and  brown 
earthenware, white water -lilies  were  floating,  so that she  seemed  to be 
enthroned in the midst of a pool. 
     'Enter, good guests!'  she said, and as she spoke they knew that it was 
her  clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid steps further  
into  the room,  and  began  to bow  low,  feeling  strangely surprised  and 
awkward,  like folk that, knocking at a  cottage door to  beg for a drink of 
water, have been answered  by a fair young elf-queen clad in living flowers.  
But  before they could  say anything, she  sprang  lightly up  and  over the 
lily-bowls,  and ran  laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled 
softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river. 
     'Come dear  folk!' she said,  taking Frodo by the hand.  'Laugh  and be  
merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of  the River.' Then lightly she passed them 
and closing the door she turned her back to  it, with her  white arms spread 
out  across  it. 'Let us  shut out the night!'  she said. 'For you are still 
afraid, per haps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things. 
Fear nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.' 
     The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them and  
smiled. 'Fair lady  Goldberry!' said Frodo at last,  feeling his heart moved 
with  a joy that he did not understand. He stood  as  he had at times  stood 
enchanted by fair elven-voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was 
different:  less keen and lofty  was the  delight, but deeper and nearer  to 
mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' he said 
again. 'Now the joy that  was hidden in the songs we heard is  made plain to 

####-me. 
     O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water! 
     O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter! 
     O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after! 
     O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves' laughter!'  
     Suddenly he  stopped  and  stammered,  overcome  with surprise  to hear  
himself saying such things. But Goldberry laughed. 
     'Welcome!'  she said.  'I had not heard that folk of the  Shire were so 
sweet-tongued. But I see you are an elf-friend; the light  in your eyes  and 
the ring in your voice tells it. This is  a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait 
for the Master   of the house! He will not be long. He is tending  your tired 
beasts.' 
     The hobbits sat down gladly in  low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberry 
busied herself about the table; and their eyes followed her, for the slender  
grace of her movement filled them with quiet delight. From somewhere  behind 
the house came the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught,  among 
many a derry dol and a merry dol and a ring a ding dillo  the repeated words:  
     Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow;  
     Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.  
     'Fair  lady!'  said Frodo again after  a  while. 'Tell me, if my asking 
does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?' 
     'He is,' said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling. 
     Frodo looked a t her questioningly.  'He is, as you  have seen him,' she 
said in answer to his look. 'He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.' 
     'Then all this strange land belongs to him?' 
     'No indeed!' she answered, and her smile faded. 'That would indeed be a 
burden,'  she added  in  a low voice, as if to herself. 'The trees  and  the 
grasses  and  all things growing  or  living  in  the  land belong  each  to 
themselves.  Tom  Bombadil is the Master. No  one has ever  caught  old  Tom 
walking in the forest,  wading in the  water, leaping on the hill-tops under  
light and shadow. He has no fear. Tom Bombadil is master.' 
     A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat and his 
thick 
brown  hair  was  crowned  with  autumn leaves.  He laughed,  and   going  to 
Goldberry, took her hand. 
     'Here's my pretty  lady!'  he said,  bowing  to the hobbits. 'Here's my 
Goldberry clothed all  in silver -green  with flowers in  her girdle! Is  the 

####-table  laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white bread, and butter; 
milk, cheese,  and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for  
us? Is the supper ready?' 
     'It is,' said Goldberry; 'but the guests perhaps are not?' 
     Tom clapped his hands and cried:  'Tom, Tom! your guests are tired, and 
you had near forgotten! Come now,  my  merry  friends, and Tom  will refresh 
you! You shall clean  grimy  hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your 
muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!' 
     He  opened the door, and they followed  him  down  a short passage  and  
round  a  sharp  turn. They  came  to  a low  room  with a  sloping  roof (a 
penthouse, it  seemed, built on  to  the north end  of the house). Its walls 
were  of clean stone, but they were  mostly covered  with green hanging mats 
and  yellow curtains. The  floor  was flagged, and  strewn with  fresh green 
rushes. There were four deep  mattresses, each  piled  with white  blankets,  
laid on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench  
laden with wide earthenware basins,  and beside it stood  brown ewers filled 
with water, some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set 
ready beside each bed. 
     Before long, washed and  refreshed,  the  hobbits  were  seated  at the 
table, two on  each side, while at e ither end sat Goldberry  and the Master. 
It  was  a long and  merry  meal. Though  the hobbits ate, as only  famished 
hobbits can eat, there was no lack. The drink in their drinking-bowls seemed 
to be clear cold water, yet it went to  their hearts like  wi ne and set free 
their  voices.  The guests  became  suddenly aware  that  they were  singing 
merrily, as if it was easier and more natural than talking. 
     At  last Tom  and Goldberry rose and  cleared  the  table  swiftly. The 
guests were  commanded to  sit  quiet,  and were set in chairs,  each with a  
footstool to  his  tired  feet. There was a  fire  in the wide hearth before 
them,  and  it  was  burning with  a  sweet smell, as  if it were  built  of 
apple-wood. When  everything  was set in  order,  a ll the lights in the room 
were put  out, except one  lamp  and  a pair of candles at each  end of  the 
chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and  stood before them, holding a candle; 
and she wished them each a good night and deep sleep. 
     'Have peace now,' she said, 'until the morning! Heed no nightly noises! 
For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the 
wind  off the hill-top. Good  night!'  She passed  out  of  the room  with a  
glimmer and  a rustle. The sound  of her footsteps was like a stream falling 

####-gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night. 
     Tom sat on a while beside  them in silence, while each of them tried to 
muster the courage to ask  one of the many questions he had meant to  ask at 
supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke: 
     'Did  you  hear me calling, Master, or was  it just chance that brought 
you at that moment?' 
     Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. 'Eh, what?' said 
he. 'Did I  hear you calling?  Nay, I did not hear: I was busy singing. Just  
chance brought  me then,  if  chance  you call it.  It was no  plan of mine, 
though I was waiting  for you.  We heard  news of you,  and learned that you 
were wandering. We guessed you'd come ere long down to the water:  all paths 
lead  that  way, down to  Withywindle. Old grey  Willow-man, he's  a  mighty 
singer; and it's hard for little folk to escape  his cunning mazes.  But Tom 
had an errand there, that he dared not hinder.' Tom  nodded as if sleep  was 
taking him again; but he went on in a soft singing voice: 
     I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies, 
     green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady, 
     the last ere the year's end to keep them from the winter, 
     to flower by her pretty feet tilt the snows are melted. 
     Each year at summer's end I go to find them for her, 
     in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle; 
     there they open first in spring and there they linger latest. 
     By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter, 
     fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes. 
     Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating! 
     He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue: 
     And that proved well for you -- for now I shall no longer 
     go down deep again along the forest-water, 
     not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passing 
     Old Man Willow's house this side of spring-time, 
     not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter 
     dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water. 
     He  fell  silent  again;  but  Frodo  could  not help asking  one  more 
question: the one he most desired to have answered.  'Tell  us, Master,'  he 
said, 'about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before.' 
     'No, don't!' said Merry and  Pippin together, sitting suddenly upright. 
'Not now! Not until the morning!' 

####-     'That is right!' said the old man.  'Now  is the time for resting. Some 
things  are  ill  to hear  when  the  world's  in  shadow.  Sleep  till  the 
morning-light, rest on  the  pillow! Heed no nightly  noise!  Fear  no  grey 
willow!' And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a 
candle in either hand he led them out of the room. 
     Their mattresses and  pillows were soft as down, and  the blankets were 
of white  wool. They had hardly laid  themselves on the deep beds and  drawn 
the light covers over them before they were asleep. 
     In the dead night, Frodo lay  in a dream without light. Then he saw the 
young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall 
of  rock, pierced by a  dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that 
he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock -wall was a circle of 
hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a  
pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stood 
the figure of  a man. The moon as it rose seemed to hang for a  moment above 
his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the 
dark plain below came the crying  of fell voices, and  the  howling of  many  
wolves. Suddenly  a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the 
moon. The figure lifted his arms and a  light flashed from the staff that he 
wielded. A mighty ea gle  swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed 
and 
the wolves yammered. There was a noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it 
was borne the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East.  
'Black Riders!'  thought  Frodo as  he wakened, with the  sound of the hoofs 
still  echoing in his  mind.  He wondered if  he would ever  again  have the 
courage to leave the safety  of these stone walls. He lay  motionless, still 
listening;  but all  was now silent, and  at last he turned and fell  asleep 
again or wandered into some other unremembered dream. 
     At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly;  but a change came over his 
dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or thought he had 
waked, 
and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his  dream: 
tip-tap,  squeak:  the  noise  was  like  branches  fretting  in  the  wind, 
twig-fingers scraping  wall and window: creak, creak, creak. He wondered  if 
there were  willow-trees close  to  the  house; and  then suddenly he  had a  
dreadful feeling that he was not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the 
willow and listening  to that horrible dry  creaking  voice laughing  at him 

####-again. He sat up,  and felt the soft pillows yield to  his hands, and he lay 
down again relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his  ears: 'Fear  
nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!' Then he went 
to sleep again. 
     It  was the  sound of  water  that Merry heard falling  into  his quiet 
sleep:   water  streaming  down   gently,  and  then   spreading,  spreading 
irresistibly all round  the  house  into a  dark shoreless pool. It  gurgled 
under the walls, and was  rising slowly but surely. 'I shall be drowned!' he 
thought. It will find its  way in,  and then I shall drown.' He felt that he 
was  lying  in a soft slimy bog,  and  springing up  he set  his fool on the 
corner of  a  cold hard  flagstone. Then he  remembered where he was and lay 
down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing: 'Nothing passes doors  or 
windows save moonlight  and  starlight  and  the wind off  the  hill-top.' A 
little  breath of sweet air moved  the  curtain. He breathed deep  and  fell 
asleep again. 
     As far  as  he could  remember, Sam slept  through the  night  in  deep 
content, if logs are contented. 
     They woke  up, all four  at  once, in the morning light. Tom was moving 
about the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them stir he clapped 
his hands, and cried:  'Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!' He drew 
back the  yellow curtains, and  the hobbits  saw that these  had covered the 
windows, at either end of the room, one looking east  and the other  looking  
west. 
     They leapt up  refreshed. Frodo  ran  to the eastern window, and  found 
himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected to 
see turf right up to the  walls, turf all pocked  with hoof-prints. Actually 
his view was screened  by a  tall line of beans on poles; but above and  far 
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise. It was a  
pale  morning: in the East,  behind long  clouds like lines  of  soiled wool 
stained red at the  edges, lay glimmering deeps of  yellow. The sky spoke of 
rain to come; but the light was broadening quickly,  and the red  flowers on 
the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves.  
     Pippin looked out of  the western window, down into a pool of mist. The  
Forest  was hidden  under a fog. It was  like looking down  on to  a sloping 
cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken 
into many plumes and billows; the valley of  the Withywindle. The stream ran 
down  the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand 

####-was a flower -garden and a clipped  hedge silver -netted, and beyond that grey 
shaven grass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen. 
     'Good  morning,  merry  friends!' cried Tom, opening the eastern window 
wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a  rainy smell. 'Sun  won't show her face 
much today. I'm thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hilltops,  
since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass underfoot, wet 
sky above me.  I wakened Goldberry singing under  window;  but  nought 
wakes 
hobbit-folk in  the early morning. In the night little  folk wake up in  the 
darkness, and sleep after light has come! Ring  a  ding dillo! Wake now,  my  
merry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring  a ding dillo del! derry del, 
my  hearties!  If you  come  soon you'll find breakfast on the table. If you  
come late you'll get grass and rain-water!' 
     Needless  to  say - not that Tom's threat  sounded  very  serious  - the 
hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning lo  
look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry  were there. Tom could be heard 
about  the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, and 
singing  here  and  there  outside.  The  room  looked   westward  over  the 
mist -clouded valley, and the  window was open. Water dripped  down  from the 
thatched  eaves above. Before  they had  finished  breakfast the  clouds had 
joined into  an  unbroken roof,  and  a  straight grey rain came softly  and 
steadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled. 
     As they looked out of  the window there came falling gently as if it was 
flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear  voice  of Goldberry singing 
up above them. They could hear  few  words, but it seemed plain to them that 
the  song was a rain-song, as sweet as  showers on dry hills,  that told the 
tale  of a river from the  spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The 
hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was glad in his  heart, and blessed 
the kindly weather,  because it delayed them from departing. The  thought of 
going had been heavy upon him from  the moment  he awoke; but he guessed 
now 
that they would not go further that day. 
     The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds  rolled 
up  to spill their laden rain on the  bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could 
be seen all round the house but  falling  water.  Frodo  stood near the open 
door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little  river of milk and 

####-go bubbling away down into the  valley. Tom Bombadil came trotting round 
the 
corner of the house, waving his arms as if he was warding off the rain  - and 
indeed when he sprang over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his 
boots. These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then  he  sat in the 
largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round him. 
     'This is Goldberry's  washing  day,' he said, 'and her autumn-cleaning. 
Too wet for hobbit-folk - let them rest while they are able! It's a good day 
for  long  tales, for  questions and for  answers,  so Tom  will  start  the 
talking.' 
     He  then  told  them many remarkable  stories,  sometimes  half  as  if 
speaking to  himself, sometimes looking at  them suddenly with a bright blue 
eye  under  his deep brows. Often his voice would turn to song, and he would 
get  out of  his chair  and  dance about.  He  told them tales of  bees  and 
flowers,  the ways of trees, and the strange creatures  of the Forest, about 
the  evil things  and good  things,  things  friendly and things unfriendly, 
cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden under brambles. 
     As they  listened,  they began to  understand  the lives of the Forest, 
apart from themselves, indeed to  feel themselves as the strangers where all 
other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out  of his talk was Old 
Man  Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed  more  
than 
enough, for it was not comfortable lore. Tom's words laid bare the hearts of 
trees and their thoughts, which were often dark and strange, and filled with 
a  hatred of things that go free upon the  earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, 
hacking, burning: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called  the Old Forest  
without reason,  for  it  was indeed ancient,  a survivor  of vast forgotten 
woods;  and  in it there  lived  yet, ageing no quicker than the hills,  the 
fathers of the fathers of trees, remembering times when they were lords. The  
countless  years  had  filled  them with pride  and rooted wisdom,  and with 
malice.  But none were more dangerous  than the Great Willow:  his heart was 
rotten, but his strength was  green; and  he was cunning,  and  a master  of 
winds, and his song and thought ran through the woods  on both sides  of the  
river.  His grey  thirsty spirit drew power out of the earth and spread like 
fine root-threads in the ground, and invisible twig-fingers in the air, till 
it had under its dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest  from the Hedge 
to the Downs.  

####-     Suddenly  Tom's talk  left  the woods and  went leaping  up  the  young 
stream, over  bubbling  waterfalls,  over  pebbles and worn rocks, and among 
small flowers in close  grass and wet crannies, wandering at  last up  on to 
the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the  green  mounds,  and the 
stone-rings  upon the  hills and in the hollows among the hills.  Sheep were 
bleating in flocks. Green  walls and white walls rose. There were fortresses 
on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms fought together, and the young  Sun 
shone like fire  on the red metal of their  new and greedy swords. There was 
victory and defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and flames went  
up into the sky. Gold was piled on the  biers of dead kings and queens;  and 
mounds covered them, and the stone  doors were shut; and the grass grew over  
all. Sheep  walked  for a while biting the  grass,  but soon the hills  were 
empty again.  A  shadow came out of dark places far away, and the bones were 
stirred in  the  mounds.  Barrow-wights walked in  the hollow places  with a  
clink of  rings on  cold fingers, and gold chains in the wind.'  Stone rings 
grinned out of the ground like broken teeth in the moonlight. 
     The  hobbits   shuddered.   Even  in  the   Shire  the  rumour  of  the 
Barrow-wights of  the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had  been heard. But it 
was not a tale that  any  hobbit  liked to listen  to, even by a comfortable 
fireside far away. These  four now  suddenly remembered what the joy of this 
house had  driven from their minds: the  house of Tom Bombadil nestled under 
the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They   lost the thread of  his tale 
and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one another. 
     When they caught his  words again  they found that he had  now wandered 
into  strange regions beyond their  memory and  beyond their waking thought, 
into  limes when the world was wider, and  the  seas flowed straight to  the 
western  Shore;  and  still on  and back Tom went  singing out  into ancient 
starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he slopped, and 
they saw that he nodded  as if he was falling asleep.  The hobbits sat still 
before  him, enchanted; and it  seemed as if, under the  spell of his words, 
the wind  had gone, and the clouds had  dried  up,  and  the  day  had  been 
withdrawn, and darkness  had  come from  East and West, and all  the sky was 
filled with the light of white stars.  
     Whether the morning and evening of  one  day or of many days had passed 
Frodo could not tell.  He did not feel either hungry  or tired,  only filled 
with  wonder.  The  stars shone through the window and the  silence  of  the  
heavens seemed  to be round  him. He spoke at  last out  of his wonder and a  

####-sudden fear of that silence: 
     'Who are you, Master?' he asked. 
     'Eh, what?' said  Tom sitting up,  and  his eyes glinting in the gloom. 
'Don't you know my name yet? That's the only  answer. Tell me,  who are you, 
alone, yourself and nameless? But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that's 
what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before  the river and the 
trees;  Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first  acorn. He made paths 
before  the Big  People,  and saw  the  little People arriving.  He was here 
before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed 
westward, Tom was here already, before the  seas were bent. He knew the dark 
under  the stars when it  was  fearless  -  before  the Dark  Lord came  from 
Outside.' 
     A shadow seemed to pass by the  window, and the hobbits glanced hastily 
through  the  panes.  When they  turned again, Goldberry stood  in the  door  
behind,  framed in  light. She held a  candle, shielding its flame  from the 
draught  with her hand;  and the  light  flowed through  it,  like  sunlight 
through a white shell. 
     'The  rain has ended,' she said; 'and new waters are running  downhill, 
under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!' 
     'And let us have  food and drink!' cried Tom. 'Long tales are  thirsty. 
And long listening's hungry work, morning, noon,  and evening!' With that he 
jumped  out  of  his  chair,  and  with  a  bound took  a  candle  from  the 
chimney-shelf and lit it  in the flame that Goldberry held;  then he  danced 
about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door and disappeared. 
     Quickly  he returned, bearing a  large and laden  tray.  Then  Tom  and 
Goldberry  set the table; and  the  hobbits sat  half in  wonder and half in 
laughter: so  fair  was  the grace  of Goldberry  and so  merry and odd  the 
caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they  seemed to  weave a single dance, 
neither hindering the other, in  and out of  the  room, and  round about the 
table; and with great speed food and vessels and  lights were set  in order. 
The boards blazed with candles, white and yellow.  Tom bowed to his  guests.  
'Supper is ready,'  said Goldberry; and now the  hobbits  saw that  she  was 
clothed all in silver with  a white girdle, and her  shoes were like fishes' 
mail. But Tom was all in clean blue, blue as rain -washed forget-me-nots, and 
he had green stockings.  
     It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the spell of 

####-Tom's words may have  missed one meal or many,  but when the food was 
before 
them it seemed at  least a week  since they had eaten. They did not  sing or  
even speak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after  
a time their hearts and spirit rose high again, and their voices rang out in 
mirth and laughter. 
     After they had eaten,  Goldberry  sang many songs for them, songs  that 
began  merrily  in the  hills and fell softly down into  silence; and in the 
silences they saw in their minds pools and  waters wider  than any  they had 
known, and looking into them they  saw the sky below them and the stars like 
jewels in the  depths. Then  once more she wished them  each  good night and 
left them by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them 
with 
questions.  
     He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, and  
indeed  to know much of  all the history  and doings of  the Shire down from  
days hardly remembered among the hobbits  themselves. It  no longer surprised 
them; but he  made no secret that he owed  his  recent knowledge  largely to 
Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more  importance 
than 
they had imagined.  'There's earth under  his  old  feet, and  clay  on  his 
fingers; wisdom in his bones, and both  his eyes are open,' said Tom. It was 
also clear that Tom  had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some  
fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo. 
     Indeed  so much did Tom know, and so cunning  was his questioning, that 
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears 
than he  had told before even to  Gandalf. Tom wagged  his head up and down, 
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders. 
     'Show me  the  precious  Ring!'  he said suddenly  in the  midst of the 
story: and  Frodo, to his  own astonishment,  drew  out the chain  from  his 
pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom. 
     It  seemed  to  grow  larger  as  it  lay  for  a  moment  on  his  big 
brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it  to his eye  and laughed.  For a  
second the  hobbits had a vision, both comical and  alarming, of his  bright 
blue  eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the 
end of his little finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the 
hobbits noticed nothing strange about this.  Then they gasped. There was  no  

####-sign of Tom disappearing!  
     Tom  laughed again,  and then he  spun  the Ring in  the  air  - and it 
vanished with a flash. Frodo  gave a cry - and Tom leaned forward and handed 
it back to him with a smile. 
     Frodo looked at it closely, and rather  suspiciously (like one  who has 
lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked  the same  and 
weighed  the same:  for that  Ring had  always  seemed  to  Frodo  to  weigh 
strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted him to make sure. He 
was 
perhaps a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so  light of what even 
Gandalf thought so perilously important. He waited  for an opportunity, when 
the talk was going again, and Tom  was telling an absurd story about badgers 
and their queer ways  - then he slipped the Ring on. 
     Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checked 
an exclamation.  Frodo was delighted (in a  way):  it was  his own ring  all 
right, for Merry was staring blankly  at his  chair, and obviously could not 
see him. He  got up and  crept  quietly away from  the  fireside towards the 
outer door. 
     'Hey there!' cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing look in 
his shining eyes. 'Hey!  Come  Frodo, there!  Where be you  a -going? Old Tom 
Bombadil's not as blind  as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand's 
more fair without it. Come back! Leave your game and  sit down beside me! 
We 
must  talk a while more, and  think about the  morning.  Tom  must teach the  
right road, and keep your feet from wandering.' 
     Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he came 
and  sat down  again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the Sun would shine 
tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and setting  out would be hopeful. 
But they  would do well to start early; for weather in  that  country was  a  
thing  that  even Tom could  not be sure  of  for long, and it would  change 
sometimes quicker than he could change his jacket.  'I am no weather -master,' 
he said; 'nor is aught that goes on two legs.' 
     By his  advice  they  decided to make nearly  due North from his house, 
over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might hope  in that way 
to strike  the East Road in a day's journey, and avoid the  Barrows. He told 
them not to be afraid  - but to mind their own business.  
     'Keep to  the green grass. Don't you go  a -meddling  with old stone  or  

####-cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts 
that never falter!' He said this more than once; and he advised them to pass 
barrows  by on the west-side, if  they  chanced to stray near  one.  Then he 
taught them a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill -luck fall into any danger  
or difficulty the next day. 
     Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! 
     By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,  
     By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! 
     Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! 
     When they had sung this  altogether after him, he  clapped them each on 
the shoulder with  a  laugh,  and taking  candles  led them  back  to  their 
bedroom. 

####- 
 

Chapter 8. Fog on the Barrow-Downs 

 
 
     That night  they heard no noises.  But either in his  dreams or  out of 
them,  he could not tell which,  Frodo heard a sweet singing running  in his 
mind;  a  song  that  seemed  to  come  like  a  pale  light behind  a  grey 
rain-curtain, and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver, 
until at last it was rolled back, and a  far green country opened before him 
under a swift sunrise. 
     The vision  melted  into  waking; and  there  was  Tom whistling like a  
tree-full of birds;  and the  sun was already  slanting  down the  hill  and 
through the open window. Outside everything was green and pale gold. 
     After breakfast, which they  again  ate  alone,  they made ready to say 
farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such  a morning: cool, 
bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue. The air came fresh 
from the  North-west. Their quiet  ponies were almost  frisky,  sniffing and 
moving  restlessly. Tom came out  of the house and  waved his hat and danced 
upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good  
speed. 
     They rode off along a path  that  wound away from behind the house, and  
went slanting  up towards the north  end  of  the hill-brow  under which  it 
sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their  ponies up the last  steep 
slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped. 
     'Goldberry!' he cried. 'My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We have 
never said  farewell  to her, nor seen  her  since the evening!' He  was  so 
distressed tha t he turned  back;  but at  that  moment  a  clear  call  came 
rippling down. There on the  hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair 
was flying loose,  and as it caught the sun it shone and  shimmered. A light 
like the glint  of  water on dewy grass  flashed from under her  feet as she 
danced. 
     They hastened up the  last slope, and stood breathless beside her. They 
bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round; and they  looked 
out from the hill-top  over lands under the morning. It was now as clear and  
far-seen as it  had been veiled and misty  when they stood upon the knoll in 
the  Forest,  which could now be seen rising pale and green out of  the dark 
trees in the West. In that direction the land rose in  wooded ridges, green, 

####-yellow,  russet under  the sun, beyond which lay hidden the  valley  of  the 
Brandywine. To the South, over  the  line of  the Withywindle,  there was  a  
distant glint like pale glass where  the Brandywine River  made a great loop  
in the  lowlands  and  flowed   away  out of  the  knowledge of the  hobbits.  
Northward  beyond  the dwindling  downs  the land  ran  away  in  flats  and 
swellings of grey  and green and pale earth -colours, until it  faded  into a  
featureless and  shadowy  distance.  Eastward  the Barrow-downs  rose, ridge 
behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it 
was no more  than a guess of  blue and a remote  white glimmer blending with 
the hem of the sky,  but it spoke to them, out of  memory  and old tales, of 
the high and distant mountains. 
     They  took a deep draught  of  the air, and felt that a skip and  a few 
stout strides would  bear  them wherever they wished. It seemed fainthearted  
to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs  towards the Road, 
when they  should be leaping,  as lusty as Tom, over the stepping  stones of 
the hills straight towards the Mountains.  
     Goldberry spoke  to them  and recalled their eyes and thoughts.  'Speed 
now, fair guests!'  she said. 'And hold to your purpose! North with the wind 
in  the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the  Sun 
shines!'  And  to Frodo  she  said:  'Farewell,  Elf-friend, it was a  merry 
meeting!' 
     But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony, 
and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope  behind  the 
hill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view.  
The  air  grew warmer between the green walls of hillside  and hillside, and 
the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when 
they reached  the bottom  of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small 
and slender like  a sunlit flower  against the  sky: she  was standing still 
watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked 
she gave a  clear  call,  and lifting  up  her hand she turned  and vanished 
behind the hill. 
     Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round the green feet 
of a steep hill into  another deeper and  broader  valley, and then over the 
shoulder of further hills, and down their long  limbs, and  up  their smooth 
sides again, up on to  new hill -tops and down into new valleys. There was no 
tree  nor any visible water: it  was a country  of  grass  and short springy 
turf, silent  except for the whisper of the air over the edges  of the land, 

####-and high lonely cries of  strange birds.  As they journeyed the sun mounted,  
and grew hot. Each time they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown 
less. When they caught a  glimpse of the country westward the distant  Forest 
seemed to be  smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf 
and root and mould.  A shadow now lay round the edge of  sight, a dark  haze 
above which the upper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy. 
     About mid-day  they  came to  a hill whose top  was wide and flattened, 
like a shallow  saucer with a  green mounded rim. Inside  there was  no  air 
stirring,  and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode  across and looked  
northwards. Then  their hearts rose,  for it seemed plain that they had come 
further already than they had expected. Certainly the distances  had now all 
become hazy and deceptive, but there could  be no doubt that  the Downs were 
coming to  an end. A  long valley  la y below  them winding  away northwards,  
until it  came  to  an opening  between two  steep shoulders. Beyond,  there 
seemed  to be  no more hills. Due north  they faintly glimpsed  a  long dark 
line. That is a line  of trees,' said Merry, 'and that must mark  the  Road. 
All  along it for many leagues  east of the Bridge there are  trees growing. 
Some say they were planted in the old days.' 
     'Splendid!'  said Frodo. 'If we make as good going this afternoon as we 
have done this morning, we shall have left  the Downs before the Sun sets and 
be jogging on in search of a camping place.'  But even as he spoke he turned 
his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher and 
looked down  upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green  mounds,  
and on some were standing  stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of 
green gums.  
     That view was somehow disquieting; so they  turned  from  the sight and  
went down into  the hollow circle. In  the  midst of it there stood a single 
stone, standing  tall  under  the  sun above,  and at this hour  casting  no 
shadow. It was shapeless and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding 
finger, or more like  a  warning. But they were now hungry, and the sun  was 
still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs against the east side of 
the stone. It was cool,  as if the sun had  had no power to warm  it; but at 
that time this seemed pleasant. There they took food and drink,  and made as 
good a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for  the food came 
from 'down under Hill'. Tom had provided them with plenty for the comfort of 
the day. Their ponies unburdened strayed upon the grass.  
     Riding over  the hills,  and eating  their fill, the warm  sun and  the 

####-scent  of  turf,  lying a little  too long, stretching  out  their legs  and 
looking at the sky above their noses: these things are,  perhaps,  enough to 
explain  what  happened.  However,  that  may  be:  they  woke  suddenly and 
uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant  to take. The standing stone 
was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward  over them. 
The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming  through the mist just above 
the  west wall  of the  hollow  in which  they lay; north, south, and  east, 
beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, heavy 
and  chill. Their ponies  were standing  crowded together  with their  heads 
down. 
     The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm,  and ran to the western rim. 
They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as they looked out 
in  dismay  towards the setting sun, it sank before their  eyes into a white 
sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog  rolled up 
to the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads 
until  it  became a roof: they were shut  in a  hall of  mist  whose central 
pillar was the standing stone. 
     They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but  they did  not quite 
lose heart. They still remembered  the hopeful view they had had of the line  
of the Road ahead,  and they still knew in  which direction it  lay. In  any 
case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place  about the stone 
that no  thought  of remaining there  was in their minds.  They packed up as 
quickly as their chilled fingers would work. 
     Soon  they were leading their ponies  in single file  over the  rim and 
down the long northward slope of  the hill,  down into a foggy sea. As  they 
went down the mist  became colder  and damper, and their hair hung lank  and 
dripping  on  their foreheads. When they reached the bottom it  was so  cold  
that  they halted  and got out cloaks and  hoods, which soon became  bedewed 
with  grey drops. Then, mounting  their ponies,  they went  sl owly on again,  
feeling their way by the rise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as 
well as they could guess, for the gate-like opening at the far northward end 
of  the  long valley which  they  had  seen in the  morning.  Once they were 
through the  gap, they had only lo keep on in  anything like a straight line 
and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go 
beyond that, except for a vague hope  that  perhaps  away  beyond the  Downs 
there might be no fog. 
     Their going  was  very slow.  To  prevent their  getting separated  and 

####-wandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Sam 
was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley 
seemed 
to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign.  On  either side 
ahead a darkness began  to loom  through  the mist; and he guessed that they 
were  at  last  approaching  the gap in  the hills,  the north-gate  of  the 
Barrow-downs. If they could pass that, they would be free. 
     'Come on! Follow me!' he called back over  his shoulder, and he hurried 
forward.  But  his  hope soon  changed  to bewilderment and alarm. The  dark 
patches  grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous 
before him and leaning  slightly towards one another like the pillars  of  a  
headless door, two huge  standing  stones. He could not remember having seen 
any sign  of  these in the  valley, when  he looked out from the hill in the 
morning. He had passed  between them almost before he was aware: and even 
as 
he did so  darkness seemed to  fall round him. His pony  reared and snorted,  
and he  fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others 
had not followed him. 'Sam!' he  called.  'Pippin!  Merry! Come  along!  Why 
don't you keep up?' 
     There was no answer. Fear  took him,  and he ran back  past the  stones 
shouting  wildly: 'Sam!  Sam! Merry! Pippin!' The pony bolted into  the mist  
and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry: 
'Hoy!  Frodo! Hoy!' It was away eastward, on his left as he stood  under the 
great  stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off  in  the 
direction of the call, and found himself going steeply uphill. 
     As he struggled  on he called again,  and kept on calling more and more 
frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it  seemed faint 
and far ahead  and high above him. 'Frodo! Hoy!' came the thin voices out of 
the  mist:  and then  a cry that sounded  like  help, help!  often repeated, 
ending  with a  last help!  that trailed off into a  long wail  suddenly cut 
short.  He stumbled forward  with all the speed he could towards  the cries;  
but the light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that 
it was impossible to be sure of any direction. He seemed all the time  to be 
climbing up and up. 
     Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him when he  
at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was  weary, sweating  and yet 
chilled. It was wholly dark. 

####-     'Where are you?' he cried out miserably. 
     There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware  that  it 
was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning to blow, an icy  
wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist  was flowing  past him 
now 
in shreds and  tatters. His breath was smoking, and  the darkness  was  less 
near and  thick. He looked up  and saw with  surprise  that faint stars were 
appearing  overhead amid the  strands of hurrying cloud  and  fog.  The wind 
began to hiss over the grass.  
     He imagined suddenly that he  caught a muffled cry, and he made towards 
it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, and 
the  starry sky  was  unveiled.  A glance showed him  that he was now  facing 
southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must  have climbed from the 
north.  Out  of the east  the  biting wind was blowing. To his  right  there 
loomed against the westward stars a dark  black  shape. A great barrow stood 
there. 
     'Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid. 
     'Here!'  said a voice, deep and cold,  that seemed  to come out of  the 
ground. 'I am waiting for you!' 
     'No!' said Frodo; but  he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell 
on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he 
looked 
up,  in time to see a tall dark  figure like a shadow against the stars.  It 
leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a 
pale light  that seemed to come from  some  remote  distance.  Then  a  grip 
stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and 
he remembered no more. 
     When  he came to  himself again, for a  moment he could  recall nothing 
except a sense  of  dread. Then  suddenly  he  knew  that he was imprisoned, 
caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A  Barrow-wight had taken him, and he 
was probably already under the  dreadful  spells of  the Barrow-wights about 
which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself: 
flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast. 
     But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part  of the very 
darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo 
Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of the 
Shire and  talking about roads and adventures.  There  is  a seed of courage 

####-hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid 
hobbit, wailing for some final  and desperate danger to  make it grow. Frodo 
was neither  very  fat nor very  timid; indeed,  though he did not  know it, 
Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought 
he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought 
hardened him.  He found himself stiffening,  as if for a final spring; he no 
longer felt limp like a helpless prey. 
     As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all 
at once  that the darkness was slowly giving way:  a pale greenish light was 
growing round him. It did not  at first show him what kind of a place he was 
in, for the light  seemed to be  coming out of himself,  and from  the floor  
beside  him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He  turned, and there 
in  the  cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were 
on their backs, and their faces looked deathly pale;  and they were  clad in 
white. About them lay many treasures, of  gold maybe,  though in that  light  
they  looked cold and unlovely.  On their  heads  were circlets, gold  chains 
were about their waists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by  
their sides, and shields were  at their feet. But across their  three  necks 
lay one long naked sword. 
     Suddenly a  song began: a cold  murmur, rising and  falling.  The voice 
seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin, 
sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad 
but horrible sounds, strings  of words would now and again shape  themselves:  
grim,  hard,  cold  words,  heartless and miserable. The night  was  railing 
against the morning of  which it was bereaved,  and the cold was cursing the 
warmth for which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while 
the song became clearer, and  with  dread in  his heart he perceived that it 
had changed into an incantation: 
     Cold be hand and heart and bone, 
     and cold be sleep under stone: 
     never mare to wake on stony bed, 
     never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead. 
     In the black wind the stars shall die, 
     and still on gold here let them lie, 
     till the dark lord lifts his hand 
     over dead sea and withered land. 
     He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himself 

####-on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind 
of  passage which  behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long  arm 
was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest,  and 
towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him. 
     At first Frodo felt as if he  had indeed been turned into stone by  the 
incantation.  Then a wild thought  of escape came to him. He wondered if  he 
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight  would miss him, and he might find 
some way ou t.  He thought  of himself running free  over the grass, grieving 
for Merry, and Sam,  and Pippin,  but free and alive  himself. Gandalf would  
admit that there had been nothing else he could do. 
     But the courage that had been  awakened in  him was now   too strong: he 
could not  leave his friends so easily.  He wavered, groping  in his pocket, 
and then fought with himself again; and as he did so  the arm  crept nearer. 
Suddenly  resolve  hardened  in him,  and  he seized a  short sword that lay 
beside him, and kneeling he stooped  low over the bodies of  his companions.  
With what strength he had he hewed  at the crawling  arm near the wrist, and 
the hand broke off; but at the  same moment the sword  splintered up to  the  
hilt.  There  was a shriek and the light vanished. In  the  dark there was a  
snarling noise. 
     Frodo fell  forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once 
back  into  his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of 
the  fog,  came the  memory  of the house down  under the Hill,  and  of Tom 
singing. He remembered  the rhyme  that  Tom  had taught  them. In  a  small 
desperate voice  he began: Ho!  Tom  Bombadil!  and with that name his voice 
seemed to grow  strong: it had a full and lively sound, and the dark chamber  
echoed as if to drum and trumpet. 
     Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! 
     By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,  
     By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! 
     Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! 
     There  was a sudden deep  silence, in which Frodo could hear his  heart 
beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was 
coming down through the  ground or through thick walls,  an  answering voice 
singing: 
     Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,  
     Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.  
     None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master: 

####-     His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster. 
     There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and  falling, and 
suddenly  light  streamed  in,  real  light, the plain light of  day.  A low 
door -like opening appeared  at the end of the  chamber beyond  Frodo's feet;  
and there was Tom's head (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of 
the sun  rising red  behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon the 
faces of the three  hobbits lying beside Frodo. They  did not stir,  but the 
sickly hue had left them. They  looked now as  if they were only very deeply  
asleep. 
     Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber, singing:  
     Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight! 
     Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing, 
     Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains! 
     Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty! 
     Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness, 
     Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended. 
     At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the chamber  
fell in  with a crash.  Then  there was  a long trailing shriek, fading away 
into an unguessable distance; and after that silence. 
     'Come, friend Frodo!' said Tom. 'Let us get out on to clean  grass! You  
must help me bear them.' 
     Together  they  carried  out Merry, Pippin, and Sam.  As Frodo left the 
barrow  for the last  time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still, 
like  a wounded  spider, in a heap of fallen  earth. Tom went back in again, 
and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he 
was 
bearing in  his  arms a  great  load of  treasure:  things  of  gold, silver, 
copper, and bronze; many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments. He 
climbed 
the green barrow and laid them all on top in the sunshine. 
     There he stood, with his hat in his hand  and the wind in his hair, and 
looked down upon the  three hobbits, that had been  laid on their backs upon 
the grass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right hand he said in a  
clear and commanding voice: 
     Wake now my merry tads! Wake and hear me calling! 
     Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen; 
     Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken. 

####-     Night under Night is flown, and the Gate is open! 
     To Frodo's great joy the hobbits  stirred, stretched their arms, rubbed 
their eyes, and  then suddenly  sprang up. They  looked  about in amazement, 
first  at Frodo, and then at Tom standing  large  as life on  the barrow-top 
above  them; and then  at  themselves in their thin  white rags, crowned and 
belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets.  
     'What in  the name of  wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circlet 
that had slipped over  one  eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow came over his 
face, and he closed his eyes. 'Of course, I remember!' he  said. 'The men of 
Carn  Dym came on  us at  night,  and  we were worsted. Ah! the spear  in my 
heart!'  He  clutched at his  breast. 'No! No!'  he said,  opening his eyes.  
'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?' 
     'I thought that I  was lost,' said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak of 
it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!' 
     'Dressed up like this, sir?' said Sam. 'Where are my clothes?' He flung 
his circlet, belt, and  rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly,  as 
if  he  expected  to  find  his  cloak,  jacket,  and  breeches,  and  other  
hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand. 
     'You won't find  your clothes again,' said  Tom, bounding down from the 
mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the  sunlight. One would have 
thought  that  nothing dangerous  or dreadful  had happened;  and indeed the 
horror faded  out of their  hearts as they looked at him, and saw the  merry 
glint in his eyes. 
     'What do you mean?' asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and half 
amused. 'Why not?' 
     But Tom shook his  head, saying: 'You've found yourselves again, out of 
the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Be 
glad,  my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now  heart and limb!  
Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a -hunting!' 
     He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him 
Frodo saw him  running away southwards along the green  hollow between 
their 
hill and the next, still whistling and crying: 
     Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander? 
     Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder? 
     Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin, 
     White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin! 

####-     So he sang, running fast, tossi ng up his hat  and catching it, until he 
was hidden  by a fold of the ground: but for some time his hey now! hoy now! 
came floating back down the wind, which had shifted round towards the south. 
     The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran  about for a while 
on the grass,  as he  told them. Then they lay basking  in the  sun with the 
delight of  those  that have been wafted  suddenly  from bitter winter to  a  
friendly clime, or of people that, after  being long ill and bedridden, wake 
one day to find that they are unexpectedly well and the day is again full of 
promise. 
     By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and hungry). He 
reappeared, hat first, over  the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an 
obedient line six  ponies: their own five and one more. The last was plainly 
old Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger,  fatter  (and older)  than their 
own ponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, had not, in fact, given them 
any such names, but they answered  to the  new names that Tom had given 
them 
for the rest of  their  lives. Tom called  them one by  one and they climbed 
over the brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits.  
     'Here are your ponies, now!' he  said.  'They've  more  sense (in  some 
ways) than you  wandering hobbits have  - more sense in their noses. For they 
sniff  danger ahead which  you walk  right  into; and if  they  run to  save 
themselves, then they run  the  right  way.  You must forgive  them all; for  
though their hearts are faithful,  to  face fear of Barrow-wights is not what 
they were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all their burdens!' 
     Merry, Sam,  and Pippin now clothed themselves  in spare  garments from 
their  packs; and they soon felt too hot, for  they  were  obliged to put on 
some  of  the thicker  and warmer things  that they had  brought against the 
oncoming of winter. 
     'Where  does  that other old  animal, that  Fatty  Lumpkin, come from?' 
asked Frodo. 
     'He's mine,' said  Tom. 'My four-legged  friend;  though I seldom  ride 
him,  and he wanders  often far, free upon the  hillsides. When  your ponies 
stayed with  me, they  got  to know  my Lumpkin;  and they  smelt him in the 
night,  and quickly  ran to meet him. I thought he'd  look for them and with 
his words of wisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old 
Tom's going to ride. Hey! he's coming with you, just to set you on the road; 
so  he needs a pony. For you  cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding, 

####-when you're on your own legs trying to trot beside them.' 
     The hobbits were delighted  to  hear this, and thanked  Tom many times;  
but he laughed, and said that they were so good at losing themselves that he  
would  not  feel happy till he had seen them  safe over  the borders  of  his 
land. 'I've got  things to  do,' he  said:  'my  making and  my  singing, my 
talking and my walking, and my watching of the country.  Tom can't be always 
near  to  open doors  and willow-cracks.  Tom  has  his house  to mind,  and  
Goldberry is wait ing.' 
     It was still fairly early  by the sun, something between  nine and ten, 
and the hobbits turned their minds  to food. Their last meal  had been lunch 
beside  the  standing  stone the  day  before. They  breakfasted now off the 
remainder of  Tom's provisions,  meant for their supper, with additions that 
Tom had brought with him. It was  not a large meal (considering hobbits  and 
the circumstances), but they felt much better for it. While they were eating 
Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he 
made into a pile that glistened and  sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie 
there 'free to  all finders,  birds, beasts. Elves  or Men,  and  all kindly 
creatures'; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and 
no Wight  ever  come back to it. He chose for himself from the pile a brooch  
set  with  blue  stones,  many-shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue 
butterflies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shaking his 
head, and saying at last:  
     'Here is a pretty toy for  Tom and for his  lady! Fair was she who long 
ago  wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not 
forget her!' 
     For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen, 
of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold. 
They 
gleamed as he drew them  from their black sheaths,  wrought of  some strange 
metal,  light and  strong, and set with  many fiery stones.  Whether by some 
virtue in these sheaths or  because of the spell  that lay on the mound, the 
blades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun. 
     'Old  knives are long  enough  as  swords for  hobbit-people,' he said. 
'Sharp  blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking , east,  south,  or  
far away into dark  and danger.'  Then he told  them that these  blades were 
forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the 
Dark 

####-Lord,  but  they were overcome  by the evil king of Carn Dym in  the Land of 
Angmar . 
     'Few now remember them,' Tom murmured,  'yet  still some  go wandering, 
sons of forgotten  kings walking in loneliness,  guarding  from  evil things 
folk that are heedless.' 
     The hobbits  did not understand his  words, but as  he spoke they had a 
vision  as it  were of a  great expanse of  years  behind them,  like a vast  
shadowy  plain over  which there strode  shapes  of Men, tall and grim  with 
bright swords,  and last came  one with a star on his  brow. Then the vision 
faded,  and they were back  in the sunlit world. It was time to start again. 
They made ready,  packing  their  bags  and lading  their  ponies. Their new 
weapons they hung on their  leather belts under  their jackets, feeling them 
very awkward, and  wondering  if they would be of  any use. Fighting had not 
before occurred to any of  them  as one  of the  adventures  in which  their 
flight would land them. 
     At last  they  set off. They led their ponies down the hill;  and  then 
mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They looked back and saw the 
top of the old mound on the hill, and  from it the sunlight on the gold went 
up like a yellow flame. Then they turned  a shoulder of the Downs and it was 
hidden from view.  
     Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of the great 
stones standing like  a gate, and before long they came to the  northern gap 
and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away before them. It was a merry 
journey with  Tom Bombadil trotting gaily  beside them, or  before  them, on 
Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his girth promised. Tom  
sang 
most of the time, but  it  was chiefly  nonsense, or else  perhaps a strange 
language unknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were 
mainly 
those of wonder and delight. 
     They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was further  
away  than  they  had  imagined. Even without a fog,  their sleep at mid-day 
would have prevented them from reaching it  until after nightfall on the day 
before.  The dark line they had seen was  not  a line of trees but a line of 
bushes growing on the edge  of a deep dike with  a steep wall on the further  
side.  Tom said that it had once been  the boundary of a kingdom, but a very 
long lime ago. He seemed to remember  something sad about it, and would  not 

####-say much. 
     They climbed down  and out  of the dike and through a gap  in the wall, 
and then  Tom turned due north, for they  had been  bearing  somewhat to the 
west. The land was now open and fairly level, and they quickened their pace, 
but  the  sun was already sinking low when at  last  they saw a line of tall 
trees  ahead,  and they knew that they had come back  to the Road after many 
unexpected adventures.  They galloped their ponies  over  the last furlongs,  
and halted u nder the long shadows of the trees. They  were on  the  top of a  
sloping bank,  and  the Road,  now dim as evening drew on, wound away  
below 
them. At this point  it ran nearly  from South-west  to North-east,  and  on 
their right it  fell quickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted and bore 
many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes  full of 
water. They rode down the  bank and looked up and down. There was nothing 
to 
be  seen. 'Well,  here we  are again at  last!'  said  Frodo.  'I suppose  we 
haven't  lost more than two days  by  my short  cut through the Forest!  But 
perhaps the delay will prove useful  - it may have put them off our trail.' 
     The others looked at  him.  The shadow of the fear of the  Black Riders 
came suddenly over them  again. Ever since they had entered  the Forest they 
had thought chiefly of getting back  to  the  Road;  only  now  when it  lay 
beneath their feet  did they remember the danger which pursued them, and was 
more than likely  to be  lying in wait for  them upon the Road  itself. They 
looked anxiously back towards the setting sun,  but  the Road was  brown and 
empty. 
     'Do you  think,'  asked Pippin hesitatingly,  'do you  think we may  be 
pursued, tonight?' 
     'No, I hope not  tonight,' answered Tom Bombadil; 'nor perhaps the next 
day. But do not trust my guess; for I  cannot tell  for certain. Out east my 
knowledge fails. Tom is not master of  Riders from the Black Land far beyond 
his country.' 
     All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They felt that 
he would know how to deal with Black Riders,  if anyone did. They would 
soon 
now  be going forward  into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but 
the  most  vague and  distant  legends  of the Shire, and in  the  gathering 
twilight they longed for home. A  deep  loneliness and sense  of loss was on  

####-them.  They stood  silent,  reluctant to make  the final  parting, and  only 
slowly  became aware that Tom was wishing them farewell, and telling them to 
have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting. 
     'Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over  (after that your 
own  luck must go with you and  guide you): four miles along the Road you'll 
come  upon a village,  Bree under Bree -hill, with  doors  looking  westward.  
There you'll  find an  old inn that  is  called The  Prancing Pony. Barliman 
Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards 
the morning  will speed you upon your way.  Be  bold, but wary! Keep up your 
merry hearts, and ride to meet your fortune!' 
     They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and  drink once more 
with them; but he laughed and refused, saying: 
     Tom's country ends here: he will not pass the borders. 
     Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting! 
     Then  he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin's  back, and rode 
up over the bank and away singing into the dusk. 
     The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of sight. 
     'I  am sorry  to  take  leave of  Master  Bombadil,' said Sam.  'He's a  
caution and  no mistake.  I  reckon  we may go  a  good deal further and see 
naught  better,  nor queerer. But  I  won't deny I'll be  glad to  see  this 
Prancing  Pony he spoke of. I hope  it'll be like The Green Dragon away back  
home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?' 
     'There  are  hobbits in Bree,'  said Merry,  'as well as  Big  Folk.  I 
daresay it will be homelike  enough. The Pony is a good inn by all accounts.  
My people ride out there now and again.' 
     'It may be all we could wish,' said Frodo; 'but it is outside the Shire 
all the same. Don't  make yourselves  too much at home! Please remember -all 
of you - that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, 
if any name must be given.' 
     They now mounted  their ponies and rode off  silently into the evening. 
Darkness came down quickly,  as they  plodded slowly  downhill and up again, 
until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance ahead. 
     Before  them rose Bree-hill barring the way,  a dark mass against misty 
stars; and under  its western flank nestled a large village. Towards it they 
now  hurried desiring only to find a fire,  and a door  between them and the 
night. 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. At the Sign of 

 
 
     The Prancing Pony 
     Bree was the chief village of  the Bree-land, a small inhabited region, 
like an island in the empty  lands round about. Besides  Bree  itself, there 
was Staddle on the  other side of the hill, Combe  in a deep valley a little 
further eastward,  and  Archet  on  the  edge of  the Chetwood.  Lying round 
Bree-hill and the  villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland  
only a few miles broad. 
     The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad,  and  rather  short, cheerful 
and independent: they belonged to  nobody but themselves; but they were more 
friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of 
the world  about them than was (or  is)  usual with Big People. According to 
their own tales  they were the original inhabitants and wer e the descendants 
of the first Men that ever wandered  into the West of the  middle-world. Few 
had survived the turmoils of  the Elder  Days; but  when the  Kings returned 
again over the  Great Sea  they had found the Bree-men still there, and they 
were st ill there now, when the memory  of  the  old Kings had faded into the 
grass. 
     In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within 
a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were 
mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing 
of 
their origin. They  were  taller and darker  than the  Men of Bree  and were 
believed  to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the 
languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards 
even as far as  the Misty  Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen. 
When  they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange  forgotten 
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends 
of them. 
     There were  also many families  of hobbits  in the  Bree-land  and they 
claimed to be  the oldest  settlement of Hobbits in the world, one that  was 
founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire colonized. 
They  lived  mostly  in  Staddle though  there were  some  in  Bree  itself,  
especially on the  higher slopes of the hill, above the  houses of  the Men. 

####-The  Big  Folk and  the  Little Folk  (as they  called one another) were  on  
friendly  terms,  minding their  own affairs in  their own  ways,  but  both 
rightly regarding  themselves as  necessary parts of the Bree-folk.  Nowhere 
else in the world was this peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found. 
     The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did  not themselves travel much; and the 
affairs  of the  four villages  were their  chief concern. Occasionally  the 
Hobbits  of Bree went as far as  Buckland, or the  Eastfarthing; but  though 
their  link land  was not  much  further  than a  day's  riding  east of the 
Brandywine Bridge,  the  Hobbits  of the Shire  now seldom  visited  it.  An 
occasional Bucklander or  adventurous Took would come  out to  the Inn for a  
night  or  two, but  even  that  was  becoming  less  and  less  usual.  The 
Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond 
the  borders,   as  Outsiders,  and  took  very  little  interest  in  them, 
considering them dull  and uncouth. There were probably  many more 
Outsiders 
scattered about in the West  of the World in those days than  the  people of 
the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless, were no  better than  tramps, ready  to  
dig a hole in any bank and  stay only as long as it suited them.  But in the 
Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits were decent and  prosperous, and no more 
rustic tha n most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten 
that there had been a time when there was much coming and going  between 
the 
Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts.  
     The village of Bree had some  hundred  stone houses  of  the Big  Folk, 
mostly above the Road, nestling  on the hillside with  windows looking west. 
On that side, running in  more  than half a circle from the hill and back to 
it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on the  inner side.   Over  this 
the Road crossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was barred 
by a great gate. There was another gate in the southern comer where the Road 
ran out of the village. The  gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside 
them were small lodges for the gatekeepers.  
     Down on  the Road, where it swept to the right to  go round the foot of 
the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic 
on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways;  
another ancient road  crossed  the  East  Road  just outside (he dike at the 
western end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various 
sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News from Bree was still a saying 

####-in the  Eastfarthing, descending from  those days,  when  news  from  North, 
South, and East could be heard in the inn,  and when  the Shire-hobbits used 
to go more often to hear it.  But the Northern Lands had long been desolate,  
and  the  North  Road  was now  seldom  used: it was  grass-grown,  and  the 
Bree-folk called it the Greenway. 
     The Inn  of Bree  was still  there, however, and  the  innkeeper was an 
important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and 
inquisitive  among the inhabitants, large and  small, of the four  villages;  
and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly 
dwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains.  
     It  was  dark,  and  white  stars  were  shining,  when  Frodo and  his 
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the  village. 
They came to the West -gate and found it shut, but  at the door  of the lodge 
beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and  fetched a lantern  and 
looked over  the gate at them in surprise. 
     'What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly. 
     'We are making for  the inn here,' answered Frodo.  'We are  journeying 
east and cannot go further tonight.' 
     'Hobbits! Four  hobbits! And what's more,  out  of  the Shire  by their 
talk,' said the gatekeeper, softly as if  speaking to himself. He  stared at 
them darkly for a moment, and then slowly  opened the gate and let them ride 
through. 
     'We don't  often see Shire-folk riding on the Road  at  night,' he went 
on, as they halted  a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon  my wondering  what 
business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?' 
     'Our names and our business are our own,  and this does not seem a good  
place  to  discuss them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of  the man or  the 
tone of his voice. 
     'Your  business is  your  own, no doubt,'  said  the man; 'but it's  my 
business to ask questions after nightfall.' 
     'We  are hobbits  from Buckland, and we have a  fancy to travel and  to 
stay at the  inn here,' put  in Merry. 'I am  Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough 
for  you?  The Bree-folk used  to be fair-spoken to travellers,  or so I had 
heard.' 
     'All right, all right!' said the man.  'I  meant no offence. But you'll 
find  maybe that more  folk  than old Harry  at the  gate will be asking you  
questions. There's queer folk about. If you go  on to  The Pony, you'll find 

####-you're oat the only guests.' 
     He wished  them  good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see 
in  the lantern-light  that the  man was still eyeing them curiously. He was 
glad to  hear  the gate clang  to  behind  them,  as they rode  forward.  He 
wondered why the man was  so suspicious, and whether any one had been 
asking 
for news of a party of hobbits. Could  it have been Gandalf? He  might  have 
arrived, while they  were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was 
something in the look and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.  
     The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then he went back to  
his house. As soon as his  back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly in  
over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street. 
     The  hobbits rode on up a  gentle slope, passing a few detached  houses, 
and  drew up outside the  inn. The houses looked large  and strange to them.  
Sam stared up at the inn  with its three  storeys and many windows, and felt 
his  heart sink. He  had imagined  himself meeting giants taller than trees, 
and other creatures  even more terrifying, some time or other  in the course 
of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of  Men and 
their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring 
day. He  pictured  black horses standing all  saddled in  the shadows of the 
inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows. 
     'We  surely aren't going  to stay here for the night,  are we, sir?' he 
exclaimed. 'If there are hobbit-folk  in these  pans, why  don't we look for  
some  that would be willing to take us in? It would be more homelike.' 
     'What's wrong with the inn?' said Frodo. 'Tom Bombadil  recommended it. 
I expect it's homelike enough inside.' 
     Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes. 
It had a front on  the Road, and two wings running  back on land partly  cut 
out  of the lower  slopes of the hill, so  that at the rear the second-floor 
windows were level  with the  ground.  There  was a wide  arch  leading to a  
courtyard between the two wings, and on the left under the arch there was  a  
large doorway reached by  a few  broad  steps. The  door  was open and light 
streamed out of it. Above the arch  there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a  
large signboard: a  fat white pony reared up on  its hind legs. Over the door 
was painted in white letters: THE PRANCING PONY by BARLIMAN  
BUTTERBUR. Many 
of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.  

####-     As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing  a  merry 
song  inside, and many  cheerful voices  joined loudly in the  chorus.  They 
listened  to  this encouraging sound for a moment and  then  got  off  their 
ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping. 
     They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving  them standing in the 
yard they climbed up  the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a  
short fat man with a bald head and a red  face. He had a white apron on, and 
was  bustling out of  one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden 
with full mugs.  
     'Can we--' began Frodo. 
     'Half a minute, if  you please!' shouted the man over his shoulder, and 
vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out 
again, wiping his hands on his apron. 
     'Good  evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you be 
wanting?' 
     'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies,  if that can be  managed. 
Are you Mr. Butterbur?' 
     'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service!  
You 're from the Shire,  eh?' he said, and  then suddenly he clapped his hand  
to  his forehead, as  if  trying to remember something. 'Hobbits!' he cried. 
'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?' 
     'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,' said   Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My 
name is Underhill.' 
     'There  now!' said  Mr.  Butterbur,  snapping  his fingers. 'It's  gone 
again! But it'll come back, when I have time to  think. I'm run off my feet; 
but I'll see what I can  do for you. We don't often get a party out  of  the 
Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But  there is 
such  a crowd already in the house  tonight  as there  hasn't been for  long 
enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree. 
     'Hi! Nob!' he shouted. 'Where  are  you, you woolly-footed  slow-coach?  
Nob!' 
     'Coming,  sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out  of  a door, 
and  seeing the  travellers, stopped short and stared  at  them  with  great 
interest.  
     'Where's  Bob?'  asked the landlord.  'You don't  know? Well find  him!  
Double sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's 
five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted 

####-off with a grin and a wink. 
     'Well, now, what wa s  I going to  say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his 
forehead. 'One thing drives out another, so to speak. I'm that busy tonight, 
my head is going round. There's  a party that came up the Greenway from 
down 
South last night - and that was strange enough to  begin with. Then there's a  
travelling  company  of dwarves  going  West come  in  this evening. And now 
there's you.  If you weren't  hobbits, I  doubt  if  we could house you. But 
we've  got  a room or two  in the  north wing  that  were made  special  for 
hobbits, when this  place was built.  On  the  ground  floor as they usually 
prefer; round windows and all as they like it. I hope you'll be comfortable. 
You'll be wanting supper, I don't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!' 
     He led them a short  way  down a passage, and opened a door. 'Here is a  
nice little parlour!' he said. 'I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I'm that 
busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It's hard  work for two legs,  
but I  don't get thinner. I'll look  in again  la ter.  If you want anything, 
ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don't come, ring and shout!' 
     Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He seemed 
capable of  an endless stream of talk, however busy he might be. They  found 
themselves in a small and cosy room. There  was a bit of bright fire burning  
on  the hearth,  and in front of it  were some low  and comfortable  chairs.  
There  was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, and on it was a  
large hand-bell. But  Nob, the  hobbit servant, came bustling in long before 
they thought of ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates.  
     'Will you be wanting anything  to drink, masters?' he asked. 'And shall 
I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready? ' 
     They were  washed and in the middle of good deep mugs  of beer when Mr. 
Butterbur and  Nob  came in again. In a twinkling the table was laid.  There 
was hot soup, cold meats, a  blackberry  tart,  new loaves, slabs of butter, 
and half  a ripe  cheese: good plain food, as good  as the Shire could show, 
and homelike enough to  dispel  the last of  Sam's misgivings (already  much 
relieved by the excellence of the beer). 
     The landlord hovered round for a link, and then prepared to leave them. 
'I don't  know whether  you would care  to  join the company, when  you have 
supped,' he said, standing at the door. 'Perhaps you would rather go to your 
beds. Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you , if  you  had a 
mind.  We don't get  Outsiders  -  travellers from the  Shire, I should  say, 

####-begging your pardon - often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any story 
or song you may have in mind.  But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack  
anything!' 
     So refreshed and encouraged did  they feel at the end  of  their supper 
(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary 
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it  
would be too stuffy. 'I shall sit  here quietly by the fire  for  a bit, and 
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and  don't  
forget that you are supposed to be  escaping in secret, and are still on the 
high-road and not very far from the Shire!' 
     'All right!' said Pippin. 'Mind yourself!  Don't  get  lost,  and don't  
forget that it is safer indoors!' 
     The company  was in the big common-room  of the inn.  The gathering was 
large  and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used  to the light. 
This came chiefly from a blazing  log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from 
the  beams were  dim,  and half  veiled  in smoke.  Barliman  Butterbur  was 
standing  near the  fire, talking  to  a couple  of dwarves and one  or  two 
strange-looking  men.  On the benches were  various  folk:  men  of   Bree, a  
collection of local  hobbits  (sitting  chattering  together),  a  few  more 
dwarves,  and other vague figures difficult to make out away  in the shadows 
and comers.  
     As soon as the Shire-hobbits  entered, there  was  a  chorus of welcome 
from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that  had come up the 
Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to 
the Bree-folk, so  quickly  that, though they caught  many  names, they were 
seldom  sure who the names belonged to.  The Men of Bree seemed  all to have 
rather  botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names,  like Rushlight, 
Goatleaf,  Heathertoes,  Appledore, Thistlewool and  Ferny (not  to  mention  
Butterbur).  Some  of  the hobbits  had  similar  names.  The  Mugworts, for  
instance,  seemed numerous.  But  most of them  had natural  names,  such as 
Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes,  Sandheaver, and Tunnelly,  many of which 
were 
used  in the Shire.  There were several Underhills  from Saddle, and as they 
could not imagine sharing  a name without being  related, they took Frodo to  
their hearts as a long-lost cousin. 
     The Bree-hobbits were,  in fact, friendly  and  inquisitive,  and Frodo 
soon found that  some  explanation  of  what he was doing would  have  to be 

####-given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which  
there was much wagging of heads, although neither  of these words  were much 
used in the  Bree-dialect). He said  he  was thinking of writing a  book (at 
which there was  silent astonishment), and that he and his friends  wanted to  
collect information about  hobbits living  outside the Shire,  especially in 
the eastern lands. 
     At this  a  chorus of voices broke  out. If Frodo had  really wanted to 
write a  book,  and  had  had  many ears, he  would  have learned enough for  
several chapters  in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given  
a whole list of names, beginning with 'Old Barliman here', to whom he  could 
go for further information. But after a time, a s Frodo did not show any sign 
of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about 
doings in  the Shire. Frodo did not  prove  very communicative,  and he soon 
found himself sitting alone in a comer, listening and looking around. 
     The Men and  Dwarves were mostly talking of  distant events and telling 
flews of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There  was trouble away 
in the South, and it seemed that the  Men who had  come up the Greenway 
were 
on  the  move,  looking for   lands  where they  could  find some  peace. The 
Bree-folk were  sympathetic, but plainly  not  very  ready to  take  a large 
number  of  strangers  into  their little land. One  of  the  travellers,  a  
squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was foretelling  that more  and more people 
would  be  coming north in  the near future. 'If  room isn't found for them, 
they'll  find it for  themselves.  They've a  right  to live,  same as other 
folk,'  he said  loudly. The  local inhabitants did not look  pleased at the 
prospect. 
     The hobbits  did not pay much attention to all this,  and it did not at 
the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big  Folk could hardly  beg for lodgings 
in hobbit-holes. They were more  interested in Sam and Pippin,  who were now 
feeling quite  at home, and were chatting  gaily about events in the  Shire. 
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the 
roof of the Town  Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor,  and the 
fattest hobbit  in the Westfarthing, had  been buried in chalk, and came out 
like a floured  dumpling. But there were several questions asked  that  made 
Frodo a little uneasy. One of  the Bree-landers, who seemed to  have been in 
the Shire  several times, wanted to know where the  Underhills lived and who 
they were related to. 

####-     Suddenly  Frodo  noticed  that  a  strange-looking  weather -beaten man, 
sitting in  the  shadows near the  wall, was  also listening intently to the 
hobbit-talk. He had  a  tall tankard  in  front of him, and  was  smoking  a  
long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs  were stretched out before him, 
showing high boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much 
wear and were now caked with mud. A travel-stained cloak of heavy dark-
green 
cloth was  drawn  close  about him, and in spite of the heat of the room  he 
wore a hood  that overshadowed his  face; but the gleam of his eyes could be 
seen as he watched the hobbits. 
     'Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he  got  a chance  to  whisper  to Mr. 
Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him?' 
     'Him?' said  the  landlord in  an  answering whisper,  cocking  an  eye 
without  turning his head. 'I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering 
folk -Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare 
tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he 
pops  up again. He was in and out  pretty  often last spring; but I  haven't  
seen  him about lately. What his  right name is I've  never  heard: but he's 
known round here as Strider. Goes  about at a great pace on his long shanks;  
though  he  don't  tell nobody what cause  he has to hurry.  But there's  no 
accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the 
Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you  should  ask about  him.' But  at 
that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away  by a demand for more ale  and his 
last remark remained unexplained. 
     Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he  had heard or  
guessed  all that had been said.  Presently,  with a wave of his hand and  a  
nod, he invited Frodo to come over  and sit  by  him. As  Frodo drew near be  
threw back his  hood, showing  a shaggy head of dark hair  necked with grey, 
and in a pale stem face a pair of keen grey eyes.  
     'I  am called Strider,'  he said  in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to 
meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.' 
     'He  did,' said  Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under  the 
stare of those keen eyes.  
     'Well, Master Underhill,' said Strider,  'if I were  you, I should stop 
your  young friends  from talking too much. Drink , fire,  and chance-meeting 
are pleasant enough, but, well - this  isn't the Shire. There are queer folk  
about. Though I  say it as shouldn't, you may  think,'  he  added with a wry 

####-smile, seeing Frodo's glance. 'And  there have been even stranger travellers 
through Bree lately,' he went on, watching Frodo's face. 
     Frodo returned his  gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no  further  
sign.  His  attention  seemed  suddenly to be fixed on Pippin.  To his alarm 
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success 
with  the fat  Mayor of  Michel  Delving, was  now actually  giving a  comic 
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the 
Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance. 
     Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most  of the local 
hobbits, no doubt: just a  funny story about  those funny people away beyond 
the River;  but some (old Butterbur, for instance)  knew a thing or two, and 
had probably heard rumours long ago about  Bilbo's vanishing. It would bring 
the name of Baggins to their minds,  especially  if there had been inquiries 
in Bree after that name. 
     Frodo  fidgeted,  wondering  what to  do.  Pippin  was  evidently  much 
enjoying  the attention he was getting,  and had  become  quite forgetful of 
their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even 
mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous.  
     'You had better do something quick!' whispered Strider in his ear. 
     Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to  talk. The attention 
of Pippin's audience was disturbed. Some of the  hobbits looked at Frodo and 
laughed and clapped, thinking that  Mr. Underhill  had taken as  much ale as 
was good for him. 
     Frodo  suddenly felt very foolish,  and found himself (as was his habit 
when making a speech) fingering  the things in his pocket. He felt the  Ring  
on its chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came over him to slip it on 
and vanish out of the silly  situation. It seemed to him,  somehow, as if me 
suggestion came to him from outside,  from someone or  something a the room. 
He resisted the  temptation firmly, and clasped  the Ring in his hand, as if 
to keep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief.  At 
any rate it  gave him no inspiration. He spoke  'a  few suitable  words', as 
they  would have said  in the  Shire: We  are all  very much gratified by the 
kindness of your reception, and  I  venture to hope that my brief visit will 
help to  renew  the old ties of  friendship between the Shire and Bree;  and 
then he hesitated and coughed. 
     Everyone in the room was now  looking at him. 'A song!' shouted one  of 
the hobbits.  'A song! A song!' shouted all the others.  'Come on now, master, 

####-sing us something that we haven't heard before!' 
     For  a  moment  Frodo  stood gaping. Then  in  desperation he  began  a  
ridiculous song tha t Bilbo had been rather  fond of (and indeed rather proud 
of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that  is 
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a  
few words of it are now, as a rule, remember ed. 
     There is an inn, a merry old inn 
     beneath an old grey hill, 
     And there they brew a beer so brown  
     That the Man in the Moon himself came down  
     one night to drink his fill. 
 
     The ostler has a tipsy cat 
     that plays a five-stringed fiddle; 
     And up and down he runs his bow,  
     Now squeaking high, now purring low,  
     now sawing in the middle. 
 
     The landlord keeps a little dog 
     that is mighty fond of jokes; 
     When there's good cheer among the guests, 
     He cocks an ear at all the jests 
     and laughs until he chokes. 
 
     They also keep a horned cow 
     as proud as any queen; 
     But music turns her head like ale, 
     And makes her wave her tufted tail 
     and dance upon the green. 
 
     And O! the rows of silver dishes 
     and the store of silver spoons! 
     For Sunday* there's a special pair, 
     And these they polish up with care 
     on Saturday afternoons. 
 
     The Man in the Moon was drinking deep, 

####-     and the cat began to wail; 
     A dish and a  spoon on the table danced, 
     The cow in the garden madly pranced, 
     and the little dog chased his tail. 
 
     The Man in the Moon took another mug, 
     and then rolled beneath his chair; 
     And there he dozed and dreamed of ale, 
     Till in the sky the stars were pale, 
     and dawn was in the air. 
 
     Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat: 
     'The white horses of the Moon, 
     They neigh and champ their silver bits; 
     But their master's been and drowned his wits, 
     and the Sun'll be rising soon!'  
 
     So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle, 
     a jig that would wake the dead: 
     He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune, 
     While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon: 
     'It's after three!' he said. 
 
     They rolled the Man slowly up the hill 
     and bundled him into the Moon, 
     While his horses galloped up in rear, 
     And the cow came capering like a deer, 
     and a dish ran up with the spoon. 
 
     Now quicker the fiddle went deedle -dum-diddle; 
     the dog began to roar, 
     The cow and the horses stood on their heads; 
     The guests all bounded from their beds 
     and danced upon the floor. 
 
     With a ping and a pong the fiddle -strings broke! 
     the cow jumped over the Moon, 

####-     And the little dog laughed to see such fun, 
     And the Saturday dish went off at a run 
     with the silver Sunday spoon. 
 
     The round Moon rolled behind the hill 
     as the Sun raised up her head. 
     She* hardly believed her fiery eyes; 
     For though it was day, to her surprise 
     they all went back to bed! 
     There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a  good voice, and the song  
tickled their fancy.  'Where's old Barley?' they  cried. 'He ought  to  hear 
this. Bob  ought to learn his cat  the fiddle, and then we'd have a  dance.' 
They called for more ale, and  began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master! 
Come on now! Once more!' 
     They made  Frodo have another drink,  and then  begin his  song  again, 
while many of them  joined  in; for the tune was  well known, and  they were 
quick at picking up  words.  It  was now Frodo's turn to feel  pleased  with 
himself. He capered  about on the table; and when he came  a second  time to 
the cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for  
he came down,  bang, into a  tray full of mugs, and slipped, and  rolled off 
the table with  a crash, clatter, and bump!  The audience  all opened  their 
mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer  
disappeared. He simply  vanished, as  if he had  gone slap through the floor  
without leaving a hole!  
     The  local hobbits  stared in  amazement, and then sprang to their feet 
and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam, 
who 
found themselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and  doubtfully from 
a  distance.  It was  plain  that many  people  regarded  them  now  as  the 
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But 
there 
was one  swarthy Bree-lander, who stood looking at them with  a knowing  and 
half-mocking expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he 
slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the two had 
been  whispering  together  a  good  deal  during  the  evening.  Harry  the 
gatekeeper also went out just behind them.. 
     Frodo felt  a fool. Not knowing what else  to do, he crawled away under  

####-the tables to the  dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of 
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back  against the wall and took off the Ring. How 
it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he 
had  been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and  that somehow  it had 
slipped on  when he stuck out  his hand with a jerk to save his  fall. For a  
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it 
had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt 
in the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out. 
     'Well?' said Strider, when he rea ppeared.  'Why did you do that?  Worse 
than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or  
should I say your finger?' 
     'I don't know what you mean,' said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed. 
     'Oh yes, you do,' answered Strider; 'but  we had better wait  until the 
uproar has  died down. Then, if you  please, Mr.  Baggins, I should  like  a  
quiet word with you.' 
     'What about?' asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper name. 
     'A matter of  some importance  -  to us both,' answered Strider, looking 
Frodo in the eye. 'You may hear something to your advantage.' 
     'Very  well,' said Frodo,  trying to appear unconcerned. 'I'll talk  to 
you later.' 
     Meanwhile an argument was going on by the  fireplace. Mr. Butterbur had 
come trotting  in, and  he was now  trying  to listen to several conflicting 
accounts of the event at the same time. 
     'I saw him, Mr.  Butterbur,' said a hobbit;  'or leastways I didn't see 
him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished  into thin air, in a manner of 
speaking.' 
     'You don't say, Mr. Mugwort!' said the landlord, looking puzzled. 
     'Yes I do!' replied Mugwort. 'And I mean what I say, what's more.' 
     'There's some  mistake  somewhere,' said  Butterbur,  shaking his head. 
There was  too much of  that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing  into thin air; or  
into thick air, as is more likely in this room.' 
     'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices.  
     'How should I  know?  He's welcome to go  where he will, so long as  he  
pays in the  morning. There's Mr. Took, now: he's not vanished.' 
     'Well,  I  saw what I  saw,  and  I saw what I  didn't,'  said  Mugwort 
obstinately. 
     'And I say there's  some mistake,' repeated  Butterbur,  picking up the 

####-tray and gathering up the broken crockery. 
     'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here  I 
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.' 
     He  came forward into  the  firelight;  but most of the company  backed 
away,, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied 
by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly  under the  tables after  
he  had fallen. Most of the  Hobbits  and the Men of Bree went off then  and 
there in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that evening. One 
or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves.  
The 
Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said 
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no 
one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall. 
     Mr. Butterbur did  not seem  much put out. He reckoned,  very probably,  
that his house would be full again on many future  nights, until the present 
mystery had been  thoroughly discussed. 'N ow what have  you been doing,  Mr. 
Underhill?'  he asked.  'Frightening  my customers and breaking up my crocks 
with your acrobatics!' 
     'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,' said Frodo. 'It was quite 
unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.' 
     'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling, 
or conjuring, or whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand  - and warn 
me. We're a bit suspicious round here of anything  out of  the way -uncanny,  
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.' 
     'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promise 
you.  And now  I think I'll be getting  to bed. We shall be  making an early 
start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by  eight o'clock?' 
     'Very  good! But  before  you go, I  should like  a  word  with you  in 
private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind that I ought 
to tell you. I hope that you'll not take it amiss. When I've seen to a thing 
or two, I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.' 
     'Certainly!'  said Frodo; but his  heart  sank.  He wondered  how  many 
private talks  he would have before  he  got to  bed,  and  what  they would 
reveal. Were  these people  all in league against him?  He  began to suspect 
even old Butterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs. 
 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 10</h4> <br>. Strider 

 
 
     Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no 
light. Merry was not there, and the  fire had burned low.  It  was not until 
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots 
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting 
in a chair by the door! 
     'Hallo!' said Pippin. 'Who are you, and what do you want?' 
     'I  am called Strider,' he answered: 'and  though he may have forgotten 
it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.' 
     'You  said  I  might  hear something to my advantage, I  believe,' said 
Frodo. 'What have you to say?' 
     'Several things,' a nswered Strider. 'But, of course, I have my price.' 
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo sharply. 
     'Don't be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you  what I  know, and 
give you some good advice  - but I shall want a reward.' 
     'And what will that be, pray?' said Frodo. He suspected now that he had 
fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably  that  he had  brought 
only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he 
could not spare any of it. 
     'No more than  you  can afford,' answered  Strider with a slow smile, as 
if he guessed Frodo's thoughts. 'Just this: you must take me along with you, 
until I wish to leave you.' 
     'Oh, indeed!' replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved. 'Even if 
I wanted another  companion, I should  not  agree to any such thing, until I 
knew a good deal more about you, and your business.' 
     'Excellent!' exclaimed  Strider,  crossing  his legs  and sitting  back  
comfortably. 'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to 
the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you  
what I know, and leave the reward to  you. You may be glad to grant it, when 
you have heard me.' 
     'Go on then!' said Frodo. 'What do you know?' 
     'Too much; too many dark things,' said Strider grimly. 'But as for your 
business --' He got  up and went to the door,  opened it quickly  and looked 
out.  Then  he shut it quietly and  sat  down again. 'I have quick ears,' he 
went  on, lowering his voice, 'and  though I cannot disappear, I have hunted 

####-many  wild  and wary  things and I can usually avoid being  seen, if I wish. 
Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four 
hobbits  came out  of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to 
old  Bombadil  or  to  one  another, but  one  thing interested  me.  Please 
remember, said one of them,  that the name Baggins  must not be mentioned. I 
am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that 
I followed them here.  I slipped  over the gate just behind them.  Maybe Mr.  
Baggins  has  an  honest reason  for  leaving his name  behind; but if so, I 
should advise him and his friends to be more careful.' 
     'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' sa id Frodo 
angrily,  'and I have still to  learn why  it interests you. Mr. Strider may 
have an honest reason  for spying  and eavesdropping;  but  if so,  I should 
advise him to explain it.' 
     'Well answered!' said Strider laughing. 'But the explanation is simple: 
     I was looking for  a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted  to find him 
quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret 
that concerned me and my friends.  
     'Now, don't mistake me!' he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam 
jumped up  with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of  the secret than you do. 
And care  is  needed!' He leaned forward  and  looked at them. 'Watch  every 
shadow!' he said in a  low  voice. 'Black horsemen have passed through Bree. 
On  Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared 
later, 
coming up the Greenway from the south.' 
     There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought to 
have guessed  it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said.  'And  the 
landlord  seems  to  have heard something. Why did  he press us to join  the 
company?  And  why  on  earth  did we  behave so foolishly: we ought to have 
stayed quiet in here.' 
     'It would  have been better,' said Strider. 'I would  have stopped your 
going into  the  common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me 
in to see you, or take a message.' 
     'Do you think he------' began Frodo. 
     'No,  I  don't  think any  harm  of old Butterbur.  Only  he  does  not 
altogether like  mysterious vagabonds  of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled 
look. 'Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a  
curl of his lip and a  queer gleam in  his eye. 'But I  hope we shall get to 

####-know one another better.  When we do, I hope you will explain  what happened 
at the end of your song. For that little prank ------' 
     'It was sheer accident!' interrupted Frodo. 
     'I wonder,' said Strider. 'Accident, then. That  accident has made your 
position dangerous.' 
     'Hardly more than it  was already,' said Frodo.  'I knew these horsemen 
were pursuing me;  but now  at any rate they seem to  have  missed me and to 
have gone away.' 
     'You  must not count on that!' said Strider sharply. 'They will return. 
And more  are  coming. There are others. I know their  number. I know  these 
Riders.' He paused,  and his  eyes were cold and hard. 'And there  are  some 
folk  in Bree who  are  not to be  trusted,'  he went on.  'Bill  Ferny, for  
instance. He  has an evil name in the Bree-land,  and queer folk call at his 
house.  You  must  have  noticed him among the  company:  a swarthy sneering 
fellow.  He  was very close with  one  of  the Southern  strangers, and they 
slipped  out   together  just  after  your  "accident".  Not  all  of  those 
Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything  to anybody; 
or make mischief for amusement.' 
     'What  will Ferny sell,  and what has my accident got to do  with him?' 
said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider's hints.  
     'News  of you,  of  course,'  answered  Strider.  'An  account of  your 
performance would  be very interesting to certain  people.  After that  they 
would hardly  need to be told your real name. It seems to me only too likely  
that they will hear of it befor e this night is over. Is that enough? You can 
do as you like  about my  reward: take me as a guide  or  not. But I may say 
that I know all the lands  between the Shire and  the Misty Mountains, for I 
have  wandered over  them for many years. I  am  older than  I look. I might  
prove useful. You will  have to leave the  open  road after tonight; for the 
horsemen will  watch  it  night and  day. You may  escape from  Bree, and be 
allowed to  go forward while the Sun is up;  but you won't go far. They will 
come on you in the wild, in some dark  place where  there is no help. Do you 
wish them to find you? They are terrible!' 
     The  hobbits looked at him,  and  saw  with surprise that  his face was 
drawn  as if with pain, and  his hands clenched the arms of  his  chair. The 
room was very quiet and still, and the light seemed to have grown dim. For a 
while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening  
to sounds in the Night far away. 

####-     'There!' he  cried  after  a moment, drawing his hand  across his brow.  
'Perhaps I know  more about these pursuers than you  do.  You fear them, but 
you do not fear them enough,  yet. Tomorrow you will  have to escape, if you 
can. Strider can take  you by paths that  are  seldom trodden. Will you have 
him? ' 
     There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was  confused 
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned,  and looked at his  master; and at last he 
broke out: 
     'With  your leave,  Mr. Frodo, I'd  say no! This Strider here, he warns 
and he says take care; and  I say  yes to that, and let's begin with him. He 
comes out  of  the Wild, and I  never heard no good  of such  folk. He knows 
something, that's  plain,  and more  than  I like; but it's no reason why we 
should let him go leading us out into  some dark place  far from help, as he 
puts it.' 
     Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam, 
but turned his keen eyes  on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away. 
'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as 
you  choose to  look. You began  to talk to me like the Bree-folk,  but your 
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should 
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?  
Who are  you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how  
do 
you know it?' 
     'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grim 
smile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get 
to Rivende ll now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You  must  
make up your  mind. I will answer some of your  questions, if that will help 
you to do so.  But  why should you believe  my story, if you do not trust me 
already? Still here it is------' 
     At that  moment  there  came a  knock at the  door.  Mr. Butterbur  had 
arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider 
withdrew into a dark corner. 
     'I've come  to bid  you  good night,' said  the  landlord,  putting the 
candles on the table. 'Nob!  Take  the  water to the rooms!' He came in  and 
shut the door. 
     'It's like  this,' he began,  hesitating and looking troubled. 'If I've 
done any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'll 

####-admit; and  I'm a busy man.  But first one thing and then another  this week  
have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see, 
I was asked to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name of 
Baggins in particular.' 
     'And what has that got to do with me?' asked Frodo. 
     'Ah! you know best,'  said the landlord, knowingly.  'I won't give  you  
away;  but  I  was  told that  this  Baggins would be going by  the  name of 
Underhill, and I was given a description that fits you  well enough, if I may 
say so.' 
     'Indeed! Let's have it then!' said Frodo, unwisely interrupting. 
     'A stout  little fellow with red cheeks,' said  Mr. Butterbur solemnly. 
Pippin chuckled,  but Sam looked indignant. 'That won't  help  you  much; it 
goes for  most hobbits. Barley, he says to me,' continued Mr. Butterbur with 
a glance at Pippin.  'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most, 
and he  has a cleft in his  chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your 
pardon, but he said it, not me.' 
     'He said it? And who was he?' asked Frodo eagerly. 
     'Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is, 
but he's a  good  friend of mine, whether or no. But now  I  don't know what 
he'll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into 
a block of  wood, I  shouldn't wonder. He's  a  bit hasty. Still what's done 
can't be undone. ' 
     'Well, what have you done?' said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow 
unravelling of Butterbur's thoughts. 
     'Where was I?' said the landlord,  pausing  and  snapping  his fingers.  
'Ah,  yes!  Old Gandalf. Three  months  back he walked  right  into  my room 
without  a  knock. Barley, he says, I'm off in  the  morning.  Will  you  do 
something for me? You've  only to name it,  I said. I'm in a hurry,  said he, 
and  I've no time myself, but I want  a message took to the Shire. Have  you 
anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can find someone, I  said, tomorrow,  
maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow,   he says, and then he gave  me  a  
letter. 
     'It's addressed plain enough,' said Mr.  Butterbur,  producing a letter  
from his pocket,  and reading out the  address slowly and proudly (he valued  
his reputation as a lettered man): 
     Mr FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE. 
     'A letter for me from Gandalf!' cried Frodo. 

####-     'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?' 
     'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that  letter  at once, 
and explain  why  you  never sent it.  That's  what you came  to tell  me, I 
suppose, though you've taken a long time to come to the point.' 
     Poor Mr. Butterbur looked  troubled.  'You're right, master,' he  said, 
'and I beg  your pardon. And I'm mortal  afraid of what Gandalf will say, if 
harm comes  of it. But I didn't  keep  it back a -purpose. I put  it by safe. 
Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day 
after, and  none of  my own folk were to spare;  and  then  one  thing after  
another drove it out of my mind. I'm a  busy man. I'll do what I can to  set  
matters right, and if there's any help I can give, you've only to name it. 
     'Leaving the letter aside, I  promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he says 
to  me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may  be coming out  this  way 
before long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that! 
But  you need  ask  no  questions.  And if I'm  not with him, he  may  be in  
trouble, and  he  may need  help. Do whatever you can for him,  and I'll  be 
grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.' 
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 
     'These  black  men,' said  the landlord lowering  his  voice.  'They're 
looking  for  Baggins, and if they mean well, then  I'm a hobbit. It was  on 
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming. Uncanny,  
I 
called  it. Nob, he came and told me that two  black  men were  at  the door  
asking  for a  hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid 
the  black  fellows be off, and  slammed the door on them; but they've  been 
asking the same  question all the  way to  Archet, I hear. And that  Ranger, 
Strider, he's been asking  questions, too. Tried to get in here  to see you, 
before you'd had bite or sup, he did.' 
     'He did!' said Strider suddenly, coming  forward into  the light.  'And 
much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.' 
     The landlord  jumped with surprise.  'You!'  he  cried.  'You're always 
popping up. What do you want now?' 
      'He's here with my leave,' said Frodo.  'He came to offer me his help.' 
     'Well, you  know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, looking 
suspiciously  at Strider. 'But if I  was in your plight,  I wouldn't take up 
with a Ranger.' 
     'Then who would  you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper who 

####-only remembers his own name  because people  shout  it at him  all day? They 
cannot stay in The  Pony for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long 
road before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?' 
     'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn't do that for any money,' said Mr. Butterbur, 
looking  really scared. 'But why can't you stay here  quiet for  a  bit, Mr. 
Underhill?  What are  all  these  queer goings on? What are these black   men 
after, and where do they come from, I'd like to know?' 
     'I'm sorry I  can't explain it all,' answered  Frodo.  'I  am tired and 
very worried, and it's a long tale. But  if you mean to help me, I  ought to 
warn you  that you will be in  danger  as long as I  am in your house. These 
Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from------' 
     'They  come from Mordor,'  said  Strider in a low  voice. 'From Mordor, 
Barliman, if that means anything to you.' 
     'Save us!' cried  Mr.  Bu tterbur turning  pale; the  name evidently was 
known to him. 'That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time.' 'It 
is,' said  Frodo. 'Are  you still  willing to help  me?'  'I  am,'  said Mr. 
Butterbur. 'More than ever. Though I don't know what the likes of me  can do 
against, against ------' he faltered. 
     'Against the Shadow in the  East,' said  Strider  quietly.  'Not  much, 
Barliman, but  every  little  helps. You  can let  Mr. Underhill  stay  here 
tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the  name of Baggins,  till he 
is far away.' 
     'I'll do that,' said Butterbur. 'But they'll find out he's here without 
help from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity  Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself 
this evening, to  say no more. The story of that  Mr. Bilbo's  going off has 
been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing 
in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he 
is.' 
     'Well, we can only hope the Riders won't come back yet,' said Frodo. 
     'I hope  not, indeed,' said Butterbur. 'But spooks  or no spooks,  they 
won't get in The Pony so easy.  Don't you worry till the morning. Nob'll say 
no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while  I can stand on my legs. Me 
and my folk'll keep watch  tonight; but you had best get some  sleep, if you  
can.' 
     'In any case we  must be called at  dawn,' said Frodo. 'We must get off 
as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.' 
     'Right!  I'll see to the orders,'  said the landlord. 'Good night,  Mr. 

####-Baggins - Underhill, I should say! Good night  -  now, bless me! Where's your 
Mr. Brandybuck?' 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had  forgotten all 
about  Merry, and it was  getting late.  'I  am afraid  he is  out. He  said 
something about going for a breath of air.' 
     'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on 
a holiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see 
your friend is let  in when  he comes.  I'd better send Nob to look for him. 
Good  night  to  you all!'  At  last  Mr. Butterbur  went out,  with another  
doubtful look at Strider and  a  shake of his  head. His footsteps retreated 
down the passage. 
     'Well?' said Strider. 'When are  you  going to open that letter?' Frodo 
looked carefully at  the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly  to be 
Gandalf's. Inside, written in the  wizard's strong but  graceful script, was 
the following message: 
     THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear's Day, Shire Year, 1418. 
     Dear Frodo, 
     Bad news has reached me here.  I must go  off at  once. You  had better 
leave  Bag End  soon, and get out of the  Shire before  the  end  of July at 
latest. I will return as soon  as I can; and I will follow  you,  if  I find 
that you are gone. Leave a  message for me here,  if you  pass through Bree. 
You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the 
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business 
and will help you. Make for  Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I  
do not come, Elrond will advise you. 
     Yours in haste  
     GANDALF. 
     PS. Do NOT use It  again, not far any reason whatever! Do not travel by 
night! 
     PPS. Make  sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men 
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn. 
     All that is gold does not glitter, 
     Not all those who wander are lost; 
     The old that is strong does not wither, 
     Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 
     From the ashes a fire shall be woken, 
     A light from the shadows shall spring; 

####-     Renewed shall be blade that was broken, 
     The crownless again shall be king. 
 
 
     PPPS.  I hope  Butterbur  sends  this promptly.  A  worthy man, but his 
memory is  like a lumber-roam: thing wanted always buried. If he  forgets, I  
shall roast him. 
     Fare Well! 
     Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam. 
'Really  old Butterbur has  made  a mess of things!' he  said. 'He  deserves 
roasting. If  I  had  got this  at  once,  we  might all have  been safe  in 
Rivendell  by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he 
was going into great danger.' 
     'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider. 
     Frodo  turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf's 
second postscript. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf's friend at 
once?' he asked.  'It would have saved time.' 
     'Would it? Would any of  you have believed me till now?' said  Strider. 
'I knew nothing  of this letter.  For  all I knew I  had  to persuade you to 
trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend 
to tell you  all about myself at once. I had  to study you  first,  and make 
sure of  you. The  Enemy has set traps  for  me before  now. As soon as I had 
made up my  mind, I was  ready to tell you  whatever  you asked.  But I must 
admit,' he added with a queer laugh,  'that I hoped you would take to me for  
my  own  sake. A  hunted  man sometimes  wearies  of distrust  a nd longs for 
friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.' 
     'They  are - at first sight at any rate,'  laughed  Pippin with  sudden 
relief after reading Gandalf's letter. 'But handsome is as handsome does, as 
we  say in the Shire; and  I daresay  we  shall all look much the same after  
lying for days in hedges and ditches.' 
     'It  would  take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering 
in the Wild to make you look like Strider,' he answered. 'And you would  die 
first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.' 
     Pippin  subsided; but  Sam was not  daunted, and he  still eyed Strider  
dubiously. 'How do we know you are the  Strider that  Gandalf speaks about?' 
he  demanded. 'You  never  mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You  
might be  a  play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with 

####-you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have 
you to say to that?' 
     'That you are a stout fellow,' answered  Strider;   'but I am  afraid my 
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I 
could kill you. And I  should have killed you already without  so much talk. 
If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!' 
     He stood up,  and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a  
light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the 
hilt of a sword that had  hung concealed by  his  side. They did not dare to 
move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly. 
     'But I am the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at them 
with his face softened by a sudden smile. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and 
if by life or death I can save you, I will.' 
     There  was  a long silence.  At last Frodo  spoke  with  hesitation.  'I 
believed  that you were  a friend before the letter came,' he  said,  'or at 
least I wished to.  You  have frightened me several times tonight, but never  
in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of 
his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.' 
     'I see,' laughed Strider. 'I  look foul and feel fair. Is that  it? All 
that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.' 
     'Did the  verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make out 
what they were  about.  But how did  you  know that they  were  in Gandalf's 
letter, if you have never seen it?' 
     'I did not  know,' he answered. 'But I am Aragorn, and  those verses go 
with  that  name.' He  drew out his swor d,  and they saw that  the blade was 
indeed  broken  a  foot  below  the hilt. 'Not much  use is  it, Sam?'  said 
Strider. 'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.' 
     Sam said nothing. 
     'Well,' said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled. 
Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we 
are allowed  to  leave  Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave  it  
unnoticed. But  I shall try to get  lost as soon as possible.  I know one or  
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the 
pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.' 
     'Weathertop?' said Sam. 'What's that?' 
     'It is a hill,  just to the north of the Road, about half way from here 
to Rivendell.  It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have  a  

####-chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us. 
After Weathertop our  journey will become more difficult, and  we shall have 
to choose between various dangers.' 
     'When did you last see Gandalf?' asked Frodo. 'Do you know where he is, 
or what he is doing?' 
     Strider looked  grave. 'I do not know,' he said. 'I came  west with him 
in the spring.  I have often kept watch  on  the borders of the Shire in the 
last few years,  when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We 
last met on the first  of May: at  Sam  Ford down the Brandywine. He told me 
that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for  
Rivendell in the last week  of September. As I knew  he  was at your side, I 
went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill;  for plainly some 
news reached him, and I was not at hand to help. 
     'I am troubled, for the  first time  since I have known  him. We should 
have had messages, even if he  could not come himself. When I returned, many 
days  ago, I heard the ill  news.  The tidings had gone  far  and wide  that 
Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of 
Gildor that told me this;  and  later  they told me that you had  left  your 
home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I  have  been watching 
the East Road anxiously.' 
     'Do  you  think  the Black Riders  have  anything to do  with it  - with 
Gandalf's absence, I mean?' asked Frodo. 
     'I  do  not know of anything else  that could have hindered him, except 
the  Enemy himself,'  said  Strider. 'But do not give  up  hope! Gandalf  is 
greater than you Shire-folk know  -  as a rule you can only see his jokes and 
toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task.' 
     Pippin yawned. 'I am sorry,' he said, 'but I am dead tired. In spite of 
all  the danger and worry  I must go to  bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is 
that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in 
the dark to look for him.' 
     At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along the 
passage. Merry came  in  with a  rush followed  by  Nob.  He shut  the  door  
hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They  stared at him in 
alarm for  a moment before he gasped: 'I have seen  them, Frodo! I have seen 
them! Black Riders!' 
     'Black Riders!' cried Frodo. 'Where?' 
     'Here. In the village. I  stayed indoors for  an  hour. Then as you did 

####-not  come  back, I  went out  for a  stroll.  I  had come back again and was 
standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I 
shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a son 
of deeper shade among the shadows across the  road, just beyond the edge  of 
the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was 
no horse.' 
     'Which  way  did  it  go?'  asked Strider, suddenly  and sharply. Merry 
started, noticing the  stranger for the  first  time. 'Go  on!' said  Frodo. 
'This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.' 
     'It seemed to make  off  up  the  Road,  eastward,' continued Merry. 'I  
tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the 
corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.' 
     Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said; 
'but it was foolish.' 
     'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I  think. I could 
hardly  help myself.  I  seemed to be drawn  somehow.  Anyway,  I  went, and 
suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and the  other  was 
whispering,  or  hissing. I  couldn't hear a word  that was said. I did  not 
creep  any  closer,  because  I  began  to  tremble  all over. Then  I  felt 
terrified,  and I  turned  back,  and was  just  going  to  bolt  home, when 
something came behind me and I... I fell over.' 
     'I  found  him,  sir,'  put in Nob.  'Mr. Butterbur sent me out with  a  
lantern. I went down to West -gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Just 
nigh  Bill Ferny's  house I thought  I could see  something in  the  Road. I  
couldn't swear to  it, but it  looked to me as if two men was  stooping over  
something, lilting  it. I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot there 
was  no  signs  of them,  and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by  the roadside. He 
seemed to be asleep. "I thought I had  fallen into  deep  water," he says to 
me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he 
got up and ran back here like a hare. ' 
     'I am  afraid that's true,'  said Merry, 'though I  don't know  what  I 
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can't remember. I went to pieces. I don't  
know what came over me.' 
     'I  do,' said Strider.  'The Black Breath. The  Riders  must have  left 
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They  
will know all the news now, for  they have visited  Bill Ferny; and probably  
that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before 

####-we leave Bree.' 
     'What  will happen?'  said  Merry.  'Will they attack the inn?'  'No, I 
think not,' said Strider.  'They are not all here yet. And in any  case that 
is not their way. In dark and loneliness  they are strongest; they will  not 
openly attack a house where ther e are lights and many people -not until they 
are desperate, not while all the  long  leagues of Eriador still  lie before 
us.  But their  power  is in  terror, and already some in Bree are in  their 
clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of 
the strangers, and, maybe,  the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at 
West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when 
they 
left him.' 
     'We seem to have enemies all round,' said Frodo. 'What are we to do? ' 
     'Stay here, and do not  go to  your rooms! They are sure  to have found 
out which those  are. The hobbit-rooms  have windows looking north and close 
to the ground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door. 
But first Nob and I will fetch your luggage.' 
     While Strider was  gone, Frodo gave Merry a  rapid account of all  that 
had happened since supper. Merry was  still reading and  pondering Gandalf's 
letter when Strider and Nob returned. 
     'Well Masters,' said  Nob, 'I've ruffled up  the clothes  and  put in a  
bolster down the  middle of  each bed.  And I made a  nice imitation of your  
head  with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag  - Underhill,  sir,' he added with  a  
grin. 
     Pippin laughed. 'Very life-like!'  he said. 'But  wha t will happen when 
they have penetrated the disguise?' 
     'We shall  see,'  said  Strider.  'Let us hope  to hold the  fort  till 
morning.' 
     'Good  night to  you,' said Nob, and went off to take  his part in  the 
watch on the doors.  
     Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour -floor. They pushed a  low 
chair against the door and shut the window. Peering  out, Frodo saw that the 
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of  
Bree-hill. He then closed and barred  the heavy inside shutters and drew the  
curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles.  
     The  hobbits lay  down  on their blankets  with their feet  towards the 
hearth; but  Strider settled himself  in the chair against  the  door .  They 

####-talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask. 
     'Jumped over  the Moon!'  chuckled  Merry as he rolled himself  in  his 
blanket. 'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see. 
The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.' 
     'I  hope so,' said Strider. Then  they all fell  silent, and one by one 
the hobbits dropped off to sleep. 
 

####- 

Chapter 11. A Knife in the Dark 

 
 
     As  they prepared  for sleep  in  the  inn at  Bree,  darkness  lay  on 
Buckland; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river -bank. The house at 
Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered 
out. A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day, and he was unable to 
rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat  in the breathless night-air. 
As he  stared out into the gloom, a black shadow moved under the trees;  the 
gate  seemed  to open  of its own  accord and close again without  a  sound. 
Terror seized him. He  shrank  back,  and for a moment he stood trembling in 
the hall. Then he shut and locked the door. 
     The night  deepened.  There  came  the  soft  sound of horses  led with 
stealth  along the  lane.  Outside  the gate  they stopped, and three  black  
figures entered,  like shades of night  creeping across the ground. One went 
to the door, one to the corner of the house on  either side; and there  they 
stood, as  still as the shadows of  stones, while night went slowly on.  The 
house and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly. 
     There was a faint stir  in the leaves, and  a cock crowed far away. The 
cold hour before dawn was passing. The figure by the door moved. In the dark 
without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed,  as  if a chill light had  been 
unsheathed.  There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered. 
     'Open, in the name of Mordor!' said a voice thin and menacing. 
     At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers burst and 
lock broken. The black figures passed swiftly in. 
     At that moment, among the trees nearby,  a  horn rang out.  It rent the 
night like fire on a hill-top. 
     AWAKE! FEAR! FIRE! FOES! AWAKE! 
     Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes creep 
from the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish. And run he did, 
out  of the  back door, through  the garden,  and over the  fields.  When he 
reached  the  nearest  house,  more  than a mile  away, he  collapsed on the 
doorstep. 'No, no, no!'  he was  crying. 'No,  not me! I haven't got it!' It 
was  some time  before anyone could make out what he  was babbling about. 
At 
last they got the idea that enemies were in Buckland, some strange  invasion 

####-from the Old Forest. And then they lost no more time. 
     FEAR! FIRE! FOES! 
     The Brandybucks were blowing  the Horn-call of  Buckland,  that had not 
been sounded for  a hundred years, not  since the white wolves came  in  the 
Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over. 
     AWAKE! AWAKE! 
     Far-away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. The black  
figures fled from the house.  One  of them  let fall a  hobbit-cloak  on the 
step, as he ran. In the lane the noise  of hoofs broke out, and gathering to 
a gallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there 
was the sound  of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the 
Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow!  
Sauron  would deal  with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they 
knew now that the house  was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down 
the 
guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire. 
     In  the early night  Frodo woke from deep  sleep, suddenly, as if  some 
sound or presence  had disturbed  him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert 
in his  chair: his  eyes gleamed in  the light of the  fire, which had  been 
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement. 
     Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled with  
the noise  of wind and of ga lloping  hoofs.  The wind  seemed to be  curling  
round the house and shaking it; and far off  he heard a horn blowing wildly.  
He  opened his  eyes,  and  heard a  cock  crowing  lustily in the inn-yard. 
Strider  had  drawn the  curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang. 
The  first  grey light of day  was in the room, and  a  cold  air was coming 
through the open window.  
     As soon  as  Strider  had roused them  all,  he led  the  way  to their 
bedrooms. When they  saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice: 
the windows had been forced  open and were  swinging, and  the curtains were 
flapping; the beds  were tossed about,  and the bolsters  slashed and  flung 
upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces. 
     Strider  immediately  went  to fetch the landlord. Poor  Mr.  Butterbur 
looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he 
said), but he had never heard a sound. 
     'Never has such  a thing happened  in my  time!' he cried,  raising his 
hands in horror. 'Guests unable to sleep in  their beds,  and good  bolsters 

####-ruined and all! What are we coming to?' 
     'Dark times,' said  Strider. 'But for  the present you  may be left  in 
peace,  when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about 
breakfast: a drink  and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be  packed 
in a few minutes.' 
     Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were  got ready, and 
to fetch them a 'bite'. But very soon he came back in dismay. The ponies had 
vanished!  The stable-doors had all  been opened in the night, and they were 
gone: not only Merry's ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place. 
     Frodo was  crushed by the news. How  could they hope to reach Rivendell 
on foot, pursued  by  mounted enemies? They might as  well  set  out for the 
Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits,  as if he  was 
weighing up their strength and courage. 
     'Ponies would  not help  us to  escape  horsemen,'  he  said  at  last, 
thoughtfully, as if he guessed  what Frodo  had in  mind. 'We should  not go 
much slower on foot, not  on the roads that I mean to take.  I was  going to 
walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count 
on getting anything to  eat between here and Rivendell, except  what we take 
with  us; and we ought to take plenty  to spare; for we  may be delayed,  or  
forced  to  go round-about, far out  of  the direct way.  How much  are  you  
prepared to carry on your backs?' 
     'As  much as we must,' said Pippin with  a sinking heart, but trying to 
show that he was tougher than he looked (or felt). 
     'I can carry enough for two,' said Sam defiantly. 
     'Can't  anything be done,  Mr. Butterbur?' asked Frodo. 'Can't we get a  
couple of  ponies in the vi llage, or even one  just for the baggage? I don't  
suppose we  could  hire  them, but we might be able to buy them,' he  added,  
doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it. 
     'I  doubt  it,'  said   the  landlord  unhappily.  'The  two  or  three 
riding-ponies that there were in Bree were stabled  in  my yard, and they're 
gone.  As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not, there 
are very few of them in Bree, and they won't be for sale. But I'll do what I 
can. I'll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as may be.' 
     'Yes,' said Strider reluctantly, 'you  had better do that. I am  afraid 
we  shall have to try  to get  one pony at least. But so ends  all  hope  of 
starting early,  and  slipping away quietly! We might as  well have  blown a  
horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.' 

####-     'There is one crumb of comfort,' said Merry, 'and more than a  crumb, I 
hope: we  can have  breakfast while we wait  - and sit down to it.  Let's get 
hold of Nob!' 
     In the end there was more  than three hours'  delay. Bob came back with 
the  report  that  no horse or pony was to be got for love  or  money in the 
neighbourhood - except one: Bill Ferny had  one that he might possibly sell.  
'A poor old half-starved creature it is,'  said Bob; 'but he won't part with 
it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how  you're placed, not if I knows 
Bill Ferny.' 
     'Bill  Ferny?'  said Frodo. 'Isn't there some trick? Wouldn't the beast  
bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?' 
     'I wonder,' said Strider. 'But I cannot imagine any animal running home 
to him, once  it got  away.  I  fancy this  is only an  afterthought of kind 
Master  Ferny's: just a  way of increasing his profits  from the affair. The 
chief  danger is that the poor beast is probably at  death's door. But there 
does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?' 
     Bill Ferny's price was twelve  silver pennies; and  that  was indeed at 
least  three times the pony's value in those pans. It  proved to  be a bony, 
underfed, and dispirited  animal; but  it did  not look like dying just yet. 
Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry  another eighteen pence 
as  some  compensation  for  the  lost animals. He was an  honest  man,   and 
well-off as things were reckoned  in Bree;  but thirty silver pennies was  a  
sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear. 
     As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It turned 
out later that only one  horse had been actually stolen. The others had been 
driven off, or  had  bolted in terror, and were found wandering in different 
corners  of  the  Bree-land.  Merry's  ponies  had  escaped altogether,  and 
eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in 
search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under  the care  of Tom Bombadil for a  
while, and were well-off. But when  news of the events at Bree came to Tom's 
ears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts at a very 
fair price. They had  to work harder in Bree, but  Bob treated them well; so 
on the whole  they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous journey. But 
they never came to Rivendell. 
     However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money was gone 
for  good, or  for bad.  And he had other troubles. For  there  was a  great 
commotion as soon as  the remaining  guests were astir and heard news of the 

####-raid  on the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamed 
the innkeeper loudly, until it became known that one of their own number had 
also  disappeared  in the  night,  none  other than Bill Ferny's squint-eyed 
companion. Suspicion fell on him at once. 
     'If you pick up with  a  horse-thief, and  bring him to my house,' said 
Butterbur angrily, 'you ought to pay  for all the damage yourselves and  not 
come shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is!' But it 
appeared that he was nobody's friend, and nobody could recollect when he had 
joined their party. 
     After  their  breakfast the  hobbits had to re-pack,  and get  together  
further  supplies for  the  longer  journey  they were now expecting. It was 
close on ten o'clock before they at last got off. By  that time the whole of 
Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of 
the black  horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that 
Strider  the Ranger  had joined the  mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as 
would last for  many  uneventful years. Most of  the inhabitants of Bree and  
Staddle, and many  even  from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the  road 
to 
see the travellers start. The other  guests in  the inn were at the doors or  
hanging out of the windows. 
     Strider had changed his mind, and  he decided  to leave Bree by the main 
road. Any attempt to set  off across country at once would only make matters 
worse: half the inhabitants would follow them,  to see what they were up to,  
and to prevent them from trespassing. 
     They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr. Butterbur with 
many thanks. 'I  hope we shall  meet again some  day, when things are  merry 
once more,' said Frodo. 'I  should like nothing better than  to stay in your 
house in peace for a while.' 
     They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd. 
Not  all  the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted.  But 
Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that 
he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in  front with Frodo; 
next came  Merry  and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony,  which was 
laden with as much  of their baggage as  they  had the heart to give it; but 
already it looked less dejected,  as  if  it approved of the  change in  its 
fortunes.  Sam  was chewing an  apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full  of 
them:  a parting  present from Nob and  Bob. 'Apples for walking, and a pipe 

####-for sitting,' he said. 'But I reckon I'll miss them both before long.' 
     The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped  out of 
doors,  or  popped over walls and fences,  as they passed. But as they  drew 
near to  the further gate, Frodo saw a  dark  ill-kept  house behind a thick  
hedge: the  last  house  in the village.  In one of the  windows he caught a  
glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once. 
     'So that's where that southerner is hiding!' he thought. 'He looks more 
than half like a goblin.' 
     Over the hedge  another  man  was  staring boldly.  He  had heavy black  
brows, and  dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in  a  sneer.  He was 
smoking a  short black pipe. As they approached he took it out  of his mouth 
and spat. 
     'Morning,  Longshanks!' he  said.  'Off  early?  Found some  friends at 
last?' Strider nodded, but did not answer.  'Morning, my little friends!' he 
said  to the  others. 'I suppose you know who you've taken  up  with? That's 
Stick -at-naught  Strider,  that is!  Though  I've  heard other names not  so 
pretty.  Watch out tonight! And you,  Sammie, don't  go ill-treating my poor  
old pony! Pah!' He spat again. 
     Sam turned quickly. 'And you.  Ferny,' he said, 'put your ugly face out 
of sight, or it will get  hurt.' With a sudden flick, quick as lightning, an 
apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and 
curses  came from  behind  the  hedge.  'Waste  of a  good apple,'  said Sam 
regretfully, and strode on. 
     At last  they  left  the  village  behind. The  escort of children  and 
stragglers  that  had  followed  them  got  tired  and  turned  back at  the 
South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some  miles. It  
bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet 
of  Bree-hill,  and  then  it  began to run  swiftly downwards  into  wooded 
country. To their left they could see some of the houses and hobbit-holes of 
Staddle on the  gentler  south-eastern  slopes of  the hill; down in  a deep 
hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising  smoke  that showed 
where Combe lay; 
     Archet was hidden in the trees beyond. 
     After the  Road had run down some way, and  had left Bree-hill standing 
tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards  the 
North. 'This is where we leave  the open and take to cover,' said Strider. 
     'Not a "short cut", I hope,' said  Pippin.  'Our last short cut through 

####-woods nearly ended in disaster.' 
     'Ah, but you had not  got me with you then,' laughed Strider. 'My cuts,  
short  or long, don't go wrong.' He took a look up and down the Road. No one 
was in sight; and he led the way quickly down towards the wooded valley. 
     His  plan, as  far as  they  could understand  it without  knowing  the 
country, was to go towards Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on 
the  east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands  to 
Weathertop Hill. In that way they  would, if all went well,  cut off a great 
loop of the Road,  which  further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater  
Marshes.  But,  of  course, they  would have  to  pass  through  the marshes 
themselves, and Strider's description of them was not encouraging. 
     However,  in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant.  Indeed, if  it 
had not been for the disturbing events  of the night before, they would have 
enjoyed this pan of the journey better than any up to that time. The sun was 
shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and 
full  of  colour, and  seemed  peaceful  and wholesome. Strider   guided them 
confidently among the many crossing paths, although left  to themselves they 
would soon have  been at  a loss. He was taking a wandering course with many 
turns and doublings, to put off any pursuit. 
     'Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,'  he 
said;  'though I don't think he  will follow  us himself. He  knows the land 
round here well enough, but he knows he is not a  match for me in a wood. It 
is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I don't suppose they are far 
away. If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.' 
     Whether because  of Strider's skill or for some other reason,  they saw 
no sign and heard no  sound of any other living thing all  that day: neither  
two-footed,  except  birds;  nor  four-footed,  except  one  fox  and  a  few 
squirrels. The next day  they began to steer a steady  course eastwards; and 
still all was quiet and  peaceful. On  the third day out from Bree they came  
out of  the  Chetwood. The  land  had been falling steadily, ever since they 
turned aside from the  Road,  and they  now  entered a wide flat expanse  of 
country, much more difficult to manage. They were  far beyond the borders of 
the Bree-land,  out in the  pathless  wilderness, and  drawing  near  to the 
Midge-water Marshes.  
     The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and there they 
came  upon pools, and  wide  stretches of reeds  and rushes filled with  the 
warbling of little hidden  birds. They  had to pick their  way  carefully to 

####-keep  both  dry-footed and  on  their  proper  course.  At  first  they made 
fan-progress,  but as  they  went on, their passage  became slower  and more 
dangerous.  The marshes were bewildering and  treacherous, and there was  no 
permanent trail even for Rangers  to find through their shifting  quagmires.  
The  flies began  to torment them, and the air was full  of  clouds of  tiny 
midges that crept up their sleeves and breeches and into their hair. 
     'I  am being eaten alive!'  cried  Pippin. 'Midgewater!  There are more 
midges than water!' 
     'What  do  they live  on  when  they  can't  get  hobbit?'  asked  Sam, 
scratching his neck. 
     They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country. Their 
camping-place  was  damp, cold,  and uncomfortable;  and the  biting insects 
would not let  them sleep. There were also abominable creatures haunting the 
reeds  and tussocks that from  the sound  of them were evil relatives of the 
cricket.  There  were  thousands  of  them,  and  they  squeaked all  round, 
neek-breek,  breek-neek, unceasingly all the night, until the  hobbits  were 
nearly frantic. 
     The  next day,  the fourth, was little  better, and the night almost as 
comfortless. Though  the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them)  had been  left  
behind, the midges still pursued them. 
     As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that 
far away  there came  a light in the eastern sky: it  flashed and faded many 
times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours off.  
     'What is the  light?'  he said  to  Strider,  who had  risen,  and  was 
standing, gazing ahead into the night. 
     'I do  not know,' Strider answered. 'It is too distant to make  out. It 
is like lightning that leaps up from the hill -tops.' 
     Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the white 
flashes, and against them the tall dark figure  of Strider,  standing silent 
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep. 
     They had not  gone  far  on  the  fifth day  when  they  left  the last  
straggling pools and  reed-beds of the marshes  behind them. The land before 
them began steadily  to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could 
now  see a line of hills. The highest of them was at the  right of  the line 
and  a little  separated from the  others. It  had a  conical top,  slightly 
flattened at the summit. 
     'That  is Weathertop,' said Strider. 'The Old Road,  which we have left  

####-far  away on our right, runs to the south  of it and passes not far from its 
foot. We  might  reach it by noon tomorrow, if we  go straight towards it. I 
suppose we had better do so.' 
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 
     'I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find. It 
is close to the Road.' 
     'But surely we wer e hoping to find Gandalf there?' 
     'Yes; but the hope is faint.  If he comes  this way at  all, he may not 
pass through  Bree, and so  he may not know  what we  are doing. And anyway, 
unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one another; it will 
not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find 
us in the wilderness,  they are likely to make for Weathertop themselves. It 
commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there  are many birds and  beasts in 
this country that  could see us,  as we stand here, from that hill-top.  Not 
all the  birds are to be trusted,  and there are other spies more  evil than 
they are.' 
     The hobbits looked  anxiously at  the distant hills. Sam looked up into 
the pale sky, fearing to see hawks  or eagles hovering over them with bright  
unfriendly eyes. 'You do make me feel uncomfortable  and lonesome, Strider!' 
he said. 
     'What do you advise us to do?' asked Frodo. 
     'I  think,' answered Strider  slowly, as  if he was not quite sure,  'I 
think the best thing is to  go as straight eastward from  here as we can, to 
make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I 
know that runs at their feet; it will  bring us to Weathertop from the north 
and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.' 
     All that day they plodded along, until the cold  and early evening came 
down.  The  land  became  drier and more barren;  but  mists and vapours lay 
behind them on the marshes. A few melancholy  birds were piping and wa iling, 
until the round red sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then  an empty 
silence fell.  The hobbits  thought  of  the  soft light of sunset  glancing 
through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away. 
     At  the day's  end  they came to a stream  that wandered  down from the 
hills to lose  itself  in the stagnant marshland, and they went up along its 
banks while the light  lasted. It was already night when at last they halted 
and made  their  camp under some stunted alder -trees  by  the shores of  the 
stream. Ahead there loomed now against the dusky  sky the bleak and treeless 

####-backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and Strider, it seemed, did 
not  sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and in the early night-hours a  cold 
grey light lay on the land. 
     Next morning they set out  again soon after sunrise.  There was a frost  
in the air, and the  sky was a  pale clear blue. The hobbits felt refreshed, 
as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used 
to much walking  on short commons  - shorter  at  any rate than  what in the  
Shire they  would have thought barely enough  to  keep them  on  their legs.  
Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been. 
     'Very odd,' said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there is 
actually a good deal less of me. I hope the  thinning process will not go on 
indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.' 
     'Do  not  speak  of  such  things!'  said  Strider  quickly,  and  with 
surprising earnestness.  
     The  hills drew nearer.  They  made an  undulating  ridge, often rising 
almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or  
passes leading into  the eastern land  beyond.  Along the crest of the ridge 
the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and 
dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the ruins  of old works of stone. 
By night they had reached  the feet of the westward  slopes, and there  they 
camped. It was the night of the fifth of October, a nd they were six days out 
from Bree. 
     In the morning  they  found, for the first time since they had left the 
Chetwood,  a  track  plain  to  see.  They  turned  right  and  followed  it 
southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so as to keep  
as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the hill -tops above and of 
the  flats to the west. It dived into  dells,  and hugged steep  banks;  and 
where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of it there 
were lines of large  boulders and hewn stones that  screened the  travellers 
almost like a hedge. 
     'I wonder who made this path, and what for,' said Merry, as they walked 
along one of  these  avenues, where  the  stones  were unusually  large  and 
closely  set. 'I am  not  sure that I like  it: it  has  a - well, rather  a  
barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?' 
     'No. There  is no barrow on  Weathertop, nor  on  any of these  hills,' 
answered Strider. 'The  Men of  the West  did not live here; though in their 
latter days they defended  the hills for a while against  the evil that came 

####-out of Angmar.  This  path was made to serve the  forts along the walls. But 
long before,  in the first  days of  the North  Kingdom, they built  a great 
watch-tower  on  Weathertop,  Amon  Syl  they called  it.  It was burned and 
broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled ring, like a rough crown 
on  the old hill's head.  Yet once it was tall and  fair.  It is  told  that 
Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in 
the days of the Last Alliance.' 
     The  hobbits gazed  at Strider. It seemed  that he  was  learned in old 
lore, as well as in  the ways of the wild. 'Who was Gil-galad?' asked Merry; 
but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low 
voice murmured: 
     Gil-galad was an Elven-king. 
     Of him the harpers sadly sing: 
     the last whose realm was fair and free 
     between the Mountains and the Sea. 
 
     His sword was long, his lance was keen, 
     his shining helm afar was seen; 
     the countless stars of heaven's field  
     were mirrored in his silver shield. 
 
     But long ago he rode away, 
     and where he dwelleth none can say; 
     for into darkness fell his star 
     in Mordor where the shadows are. 
     The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam's. 
     'Don't stop!' said Merry. 
     'That's all I know,' stammered  Sam, blushing.  'I learned  it from Mr. 
Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to  tell me tales  like that, knowing  how I 
was always one for  hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo  as taught  me  my 
letters.  He was  mighty  book -learned was dear  old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote 
poetry. He wrote what I have just said.' 
     'He did  not make it up,' said Strider. 'It  is pan of the lay  that is 
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have 
translated it. I never knew that.' 
     'There was a lot more,' said Sam,  'all about  Mordor.  I  didn't learn 
that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way 

####-myself!' 
     'Going to Mordor!' cried Pippin. 'I hope it won't come to that!' 
     'Do not speak that name so loudly!' said Strider. 
     It was  already  mid-day  when they  drew near the southern end of  the 
path, and saw before them,  in the pale  clear light  of the  October sun, a  
grey-green bank, leading up like a  bridge on to  the northward slope of the 
hill They decided to make for the top at once,  while the daylight was broad 
Concealment was no longer  possible,  and they could only hope that no enemy 
or spy was observing  them. Nothing  was to be seen  moving  on the hill. If 
Gandalf was anywhere about, there was no sign of him. 
     On the western flank  of Weathertop they  found a  sheltered hollow, at 
the  bottom of which  there was  a bowl -shaped dell with grassy sides. There 
they left  Sam  and Pippin with the pony and  their  packs and  luggage. The 
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the 
crown  of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last  
slope had been steep and rocky. 
     On  the top they found,  as  Strider had said,  a wide  ring of ancient 
stonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre a  
cairn of broken st ones had been piled. They were blackened as  if with fire. 
About them  the turf  was  burned to the roots and all within the  ring  the 
grass was scorched  and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but 
there was no sign of any living thing. 
     Standing upon the  rim of the ruined circle,  they saw all round  below 
them a  wide  prospect,  for the most pan of  lands empty  and  featureless,  
except for patches of woodland away to the  south, beyond which  they caught 
here and  there  the glint of  distant water. Beneath them  on this southern 
side there  ran  like  a  ribbon  the Old Road,  coming  out of the West and 
winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east. 
Nothing was moving on it. Following  its line eastward  with their eyes they  
saw the Mountains: the nearer foothills were brown and sombre; 
     behind them stood taller shapes of  grey, and  behind  those again were 
high white peaks glimmering among the clouds. 
     'Well, here we are!' said Merry. 'And very  cheerless and uninviting it 
looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don't  
blame him for not waiting - if he ever came here.' 
     'I wonder,' said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. 'Even if he was a  
day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first.  He can ride 

####-very swiftly when need presses.' Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stone 
on the top of the  cairn; it was flatter than the others, and  whiter, as if 
it had escaped the fire. He picked it up and examined it, turning  it in his 
fingers. "This has been  handled recently,' he said.  'What do you  think of 
these marks?' 
     On  the flat under -side Frodo saw  some scratches: 'There seems to he a  
stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,' he said. 
     'The stroke  on the left  might  be a G-rune  with thin branches,' said 
Strider. 'It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The 
scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the  marks might mean 
something  quite  different, and have  nothing  to do  with us.  Rangers use 
runes, and they come here sometimes.' 
     'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?' asked Merry 
     'I  should say,' answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and  were a  
sign that Gandalf was here on  October the third: that is three days ago now. 
It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he 
had no time or  did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is 
so, we must be wary.' 
     'I wish we could  feel  sure that he made  the marks, whatever they may 
mean,' said Frodo 'It would be a  great  comfort to  know that he was on the 
way, in front of us or behind us.' 
     'Perhaps,' said  Strider. 'For myself, I believe that he was  here, and 
was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that 
we saw three  nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to  my  mind. I guess 
that he was attacked on this hill-top,  but with what result  I cannot tell. 
He  is here no longer, and we must now look aft er ourselves and make our own 
way to Rivendell, as best we can ' 
     'How far  is  Rivendell?' asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The  world 
looked wild and wide from Weathertop. 
     'I don't know if the Road has  ever  been measured in miles  beyond the 
Forsaken Inn, a day's  journey east of Bree,' answered Strider. 'Some say it 
is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road,  and folk are  glad 
to reach their  journey's end, whether the time is long or short. But I know 
how long it would  take me on  my  own  feet,  with fair  weather and no ill 
fortune twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses 
the Loudwater that  runs  out of Rivendell. We  have at  least a fortnight's 
journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.' 

####-     'A fortnight!' said Frodo. 'A lot may happen in that time.' 
     'It may,' said Strider. 
     They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward edge. 
In  that  lonely  place   Frodo  for  the  first  time  fully  realized  his 
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in 
the quiet  and beloved Shire.  He  stared down at the hateful Road,  leading 
back westward  - to his  home.  Suddenly he  was aware that  two black specks 
were moving slowly along  it,  going westward; and looking again he saw that 
three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched 
Strider's arm. 
     'Look,' he said, pointing downwards.  
     At once Strider flung  himself on  the ground behind the ruined circle, 
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside. 
     'What is it?' he whispered. 
     'I do not know, but I fear the worst,' answered Strider. 
     Slowly  they crawled  up  to the edge of  the  ring  again,  and peered 
through a cleft  between two jagged  stones. The light was no longer bright, 
for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now 
overtaken  the sun,  as it  began to go  down.  They could all see the black  
specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain; 
yet something told them that there, far below, were Black  Riders assembling 
on the Road beyond the foot of the hill. 
     'Yes,'  said  Strider,  whose keener sight left him  in no  doubt. 'The 
enemy is here!' 
     Hastily they crept away  and slipped down the north side of the hill to 
find their companions.  
     Sam and  Peregrin had not been  idle. They  had explored the small dell 
and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they  found a spring of clear water  
in the hillside, and near it footprints not  more than  a day or two old. In 
the dell itself they  found  recent traces of a fire, and  other  signs of a  
hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of  the dell nearest to 
the  hill.  Behind  them  Sam  came upon  a  small store of  firewood neatly 
stacked. 
     'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,' he said to Pippin. 'Whoever it 
was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.' 
     Strider  was greatly interested in  these discoveries.  'I  wish I  had 
waited and explored the  ground  down here myself,' he said, hurrying off to  

####-the spring to examine the footprints.  
     'It is just as I feared,' he said, when he came back.  'Sam  and Pippin 
have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or confused. Rangers 
have been  here lately. It  is  they who left the firewood behind. But there 
are also  several newer tracks  that were not made by Rangers. At least  one  
set was made, only a day or two ago, by  heavy boots. At least one. I cannot  
now be certain, but  I think  there were many booted feet.'  He  paused  and 
stood in anxious thought. 
     Each of the hobbits  saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and booted 
Riders. If the horsemen had already  found  the dell, the sooner Strider led 
them  somewhere else  the better. Sam viewed  the hollow with great dislike, 
now that he had heard news of their  enemies on the  Road, only a few  miles 
away. 
     'Hadn't we better clear out quick, Mr.  Strider?' he asked impatiently. 
'It  is get ting late,  and  I  don't like this  hole: it makes my heart sink  
somehow.' 
     'Yes,  we certainly must decide what to do  at once,' answered Strider, 
looking up and considering the time and the weather. 'Well, Sam,' he said at 
last,  'I do not  like  th is  place either; but  I  cannot think of anywhere 
better  that we could  reach before nightfall.  At least we are out of sight 
for the  moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen by 
spies.  All we could  do would be to go right out  of our way back north  on 
this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is 
here. The  Road  is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried  to 
take cover  in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road 
beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.' 
     'Can the Riders see?' asked Merry. 'I mean, they seem  usually  to have 
used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling is the 
right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you  
saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.' 
     'I was too careless  on the  hill-top,' answered  Strider. 'I  was very 
anxious to  find some  sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us 
to go up and  stand  there  so long.  For the black horses  can see, and the 
Riders can use men and other creatures as  spies, as we found at Bree.  They 
themselves  do not see the  world of light as we  do,  but our  shapes  cast  
shadows in  their  minds, which only the  noon sun destroys; and in the dark 
they perceive many  signs and forms that are hidden from us:  then they  are 

####-most to be feared. And at all times  they smell the blood  of living things,  
desiring and hating it. Senses, too, there are other  than sight or smell. We 
can feel their  presence - it troubled our hearts, as  soon as we came here, 
and before we saw them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,' he added, and his 
voice sank to a whisper, 'the Ring draws them.' 
     'Is there no escape then?' said Frodo, looking round wildly. 'If I move 
I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!' 
     Strider laid  his hand on his shoulder. 'There is still hope,' he said. 
'You are not alone. Let us take  this wood that is set ready for the fire as 
a sign. There  is little  shelter or defence here,  but fire shall serve for  
both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can  all things, but these 
Riders do  not love it, and  fear those who wield  it. Fire is our friend in 
the wilderness. ' 
     'Maybe,'  muttered Sam.  'It  is also as good a way of saying "here  we 
are" as I can think of, bar shouting.' 
     Down in  the  lowest and most  sheltered corner of the dell  they lit a  
fire, and prepared a meal. The shades of  evening began to fall, and it grew 
cold.  They  were  suddenly  aware of great  hunger,  for they had not eaten 
anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper.  
The  lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly  places 
deserted by all the races of the  world. Rangers passed  at times beyond the 
hills, but they were few and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of 
evil sort: trolls might stray down at times  out of  the northern valleys of 
the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road  would travellers be found, most often 
dwarves, hurrying along on business of their  own, and with no help  and few 
words to spare for strangers. 
     'I don't see how our food can be  made  to  last,' said Frodo. 'We have 
been careful  enough in the  last few days, and  this supper is no feast; but 
we have used  more than we ought,  if  we  have two weeks  still to go,  and 
perhaps more.' 
     'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry,  root, and herb; and 
I have  some skill as  a  hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving  
before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long and weary work, 
and  we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables 
of Elrond's house!' 
     The  cold increased as darkness came  on. Peering out from the  edge of 
the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now  vanishing  quickly into 

####-shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling 
stars. Frodo and  his companions  huddled  round the fire, wrapped   in every 
garment and  blanket they possessed;  but Strider was  content with a single 
cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe. 
     As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out  brightly he 
began to  tell  them  tales  to keep their minds  from  fear. He  knew  many 
histories and legends  of long ago,  of Elves  and Men and the good and evil  
deeds of the Elder Days. They  wondered how  old he was,  and  where he  had 
learned all this lore. 
     'Tell us of Gil-galad,' said Merry suddenly, when he paused  at the end  
of a story of the Elf-Kingdoms. 'Do you  know any more  of that old lay that 
you spoke of?' 
     'I do indeed,' answered Strider. 'So also does Frodo,  for  it concerns 
us closely.' Merry  and Pippin looked at Frodo,  who  was  staring  into the 
fire. 
     'I know  only the little that Gandalf has  told me,' said Frodo slowly. 
'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is 
Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land 
of------' 
     'No!' said Strider  interrupting, 'I do not think that tale  should  be 
told now with  the servants of the Enemy  at hand. If we  win through to the  
house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.' 
     'Then  tell  u s  some other tale of  the old days,' begged Sam; 'a tale 
about  the Elves before the  fading time.  I would dearly  like to hear more 
about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.' 
     'I will tell you the tale of Tin®viel,' said  Strider,  'in br ief - for 
it  is a long tale  of which the end is  not known; and  there are none now, 
except  Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old.  It is a fair 
tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may 
lift up your hearts.' He was silent for some  time, and then he began not to 
speak but to chant softly: 
     The leaves were long, the grass was green, 
     The hemlock-umbels tall and fair, 
     And in the glade a light was seen 
     Of stars in shadow shimmering. 
     Tin®viel was dancing there 
     To music of a pipe unseen, 

####-     And light of stars was in her hair, 
     And in her raiment glimmering. 
 
     There Beren came from mountains cold, 
     And lost he wandered under leaves, 
     And where the Elven-river rolled 
     He walked alone and sorrowing. 
     He peered between the hemlock-leaves 
     And saw in wander flowers of gold  
     Upon her mantle and her sleeves, 
     And her hair like shadow following. 
 
     Enchantment healed his weary feet 
     That over hills were doomed to roam; 
     And forth he hastened, strong and fleet, 
     And grasped at moonbeams glistening. 
     Through woven woods in Elvenhome 
     She tightly fled on dancing feet, 
     And left him lonely still to roam 
     In the silent forest listening. 
 
     He heard there oft the flying sound 
     Of feet as light as linden-leaves, 
     Or music welling underground, 
     In hidden hollows quavering. 
     Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves, 
     And one by one with sighing sound  
     Whispering fell the beechen leaves 
     In the wintry woodland wavering. 
 
     He sought her ever, wandering far 
     Where leaves of years were thickly strewn, 
     By light of moon and ray of star 
     In frosty heavens shivering. 
     Her mantle glinted in the moon, 
     As on a hill-top high and far 
     She danced, and at her feet was strewn  

####-     A mist of silver quivering. 
 
     When winter passed, she came again, 
     And her song released the sudden spring, 
     Like rising lark, and falling rain, 
     And melting water bubbling. 
     He saw the elven-flowers spring 
     About her feet, and healed again  
     He longed by her to dance and sing 
     Upon the grass untroubling. 
 
     Again she fled, but swift he came. 
     Tin®viel! Tin®viel! 
     He called her by her elvish name; 
     And there she halted listening. 
     One moment stood she, and a spell 
     His voice laid on her: Beren came, 
     And doom fell on Tin®viel 
     That in his arms lay glistening. 
 
     As Beren looked into her eyes 
     Within the shadows of her hair, 
     The trembling starlight of the skies 
     He saw there mirrored shimmering. 
     Tin®viel the elven-fair, 
     Immortal maiden elven-wise, 
     About him cast her shadowy hair 
     And arms like silver glimmering. 
 
     Long was the way that fate them bore, 
     O'er stony mountains cold and grey, 
     Through halls of iron and darkling door, 
     And woods of nightshade morrowless. 
     The Sundering Seas between them lay, 
     And yet at last they met once more, 
     And long ago they passed away 
     In the forest singing sorrowless. 

####-     Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again.  'That is a song,'  he 
said, 'in the mode that  is called ann-thennath  among the Elves, but is hard 
to render in our Common Speech, and this is  but a rough echo of it. It tells 
of the meeting of Beren son  of  Barahir and  L®thien Tin®viel. Beren was  a 
mortal man,  but L®thien was the daughter of Thingol,  a King  of Elves upon 
Middle-earth when the world was young; and  she was the fairest  maiden that 
has ever been among all  the children of this world. As  the stars above the 
mists  of  the Northern  lands was her loveliness,  and  in her  face  was a  
shining light. In those days  the Great Enemy, of  whom Sauron of Mordor was 
but a servant, dwelt  in Angband  in the North,  and the  Elves of the  West 
coming back to Middle-earth made  war upon him to regain the Silmarils which 
he had  stolen; and  the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the  Enemy  was 
victorious  and Barahir  was slain,  and Beren escaping through great  peril 
came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in  the 
forest of Neldoreth.  There he beheld L®thien singing and dancing in a glade 
beside the enchanted  river Esgalduin; and  he named  her Tin®viel,  that is 
Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and 
they  were parted long. Tin®viel rescued Beren from  the dungeons of Sauron, 
and together they passed through great dangers, and cast down even the Great 
Enemy  from  his  throne, and took  from  his  iron  crown one of the  three 
Silmarils, brightest of  all jewels, to  be  the  bride-price of L®thien  to 
Thingol her father. Yet  at the last  Beren  was slain by the Wolf that came 
from  the gates  of  Angband, and he died in  the arms of Tin®viel.  But she 
chose mortality, and to die from  the world,  so that  she might follow him; 
and it  is sung that they met again beyond the Sundering  Seas, and  after a  
brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed, 
long ago, beyond the confines of this  world. So it is that L®thien Tin®viel 
alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left  the  world, and they have 
lost her  whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of 
old descended among  Men.  There live  still those of whom  L®thien  was the 
foremother,  and  it  is  said  that  her line shall  never fail.  Elrond of 
Rivendell is of that Kin. For of  Beren and L®thien  was born Dior Thingol's 
heir;  and of him Elwing  the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his 
ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril 
upon  his brow.  And  of  Edrendil  came  the  Kings  of  N®menor,  that  is 
Westernesse.' 
     As Strider was speaking  they watched his strange eager face, dimly lit 

####-in the red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes shone, and his voice was rich and 
deep. Above him was a black starry  sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over  
the crown  of Weathertop behind  him. The  waxing  moon  was climbing 
slowly 
above  the  hill that  overshadowed  them, and the  stars above the hill-top 
faded. 
     The  story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. 'Look!' said  Merry. 
'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.' 
     The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on the  top of  the 
hill something small and dark  against  the  glimmer of the moonrise. It was 
perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light. 
     Sam  and Merry  got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo  and Pippin 
remained seated in silence.  Strider was watching the moonlight on  the hill 
intently.  All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt  a cold dread creeping 
over his heart,  now that Strider was  no longer speaking. He huddled closer  
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell. 
     'I don't  know what it is,'  he  said, 'but  I suddenly felt afraid.  I 
durstn't  go  outside this dell  for any money;  I felt that  something  was 
creeping up the slope.' 
     'Did you see anything?' asked Frodo, springing to his feet. 
     'No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn't stop to look.' 
     'I  saw something,' said Merry; 'or  I thought  I did  -  away westwards 
where  the moonlight was  falling  on  the  flats  beyond the  shadow of the 
hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be 
moving this way.' 
     'Keep close to the  fire, with your faces outward!' cried Strider. 'Get 
some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!' 
     For a breathless  time  they sat there, silent  and  alert, with  their 
backs  turned to the  wood-fire, each gazing into the shadows that encircled 
them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or  movement in the night.  
Frodo 
stirred,  feeling that he must break the silence:  he longed  to  shout  out 
aloud. 
     'Hush!' whispered Strider.  'What's  that?' gasped Pippin at  the  same 
moment. 
     Over the  lip of the little dell, on the side away  from the hill, they 
felt, rather  than saw, a shadow  rise,  one  shadow or  more than one. They 

####-strained their eyes, and the shadows  seemed to grow. Soon there could be no 
doubt: 
     three or four  tall black  figures  were standing  there  on the slope, 
looking down  on  them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes 
in the deep shade behind them. Frodo  thought that he heard  a faint hiss as 
of venomous breath  and felt a thin  piercing chill. Then the  shapes slowly 
advanced. 
     Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the 
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his 
companions; he  was quaking  as  if he was bitter cold,  but his  terror was 
swallowed  up in  a sudden temptation  to put on the Ring. The  desire to do  
this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. He did not forget 
the Barrow,  nor  the  message  of  Gandalf;  but  something  seemed  to  be 
compelling  him to disregard  all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with  
the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt 
that he must take the Ring and put  it on his finger. He could not speak. He 
felt Sam looking at him, as if  he knew  that  his  master was in some great 
trouble, but  he could not turn  towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled 
for a while; but  resistance became unbearable, and at  last he  slowly drew 
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand. 
     Immediately, though everything  else remained as before,  dim and dark, 
the shapes became  terribly clear. He was able to  see beneath  their  black  
wrappings. There were  five  tall  figures: two standing on the lip  of  the 
dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned  keen and merciless eyes;  
under their mantles were long grey robes;  upon  their grey hairs were helms 
of silver; in their haggard hands  were  swords of steel. Their eyes fell on 
him and pierced him, as they rushed towards him. Desperate, he  drew his own 
sword, and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand. 
Two of the figures  halted. The   third was taller than  the others: his hair 
was long and gleaming and  on his  helm was  a crown.  In one hand he held a  
long sword, and in the other a knife;  both the knife and the hand that held 
it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo. 
     At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on  the ground, and he heard 
himself crying aloud: O  Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at 
the feet of his enemy. A shrill  cry rang  out in the night;  and he felt  a  
pain  like  a  dart  of  poisoned ice  pierce his left shoulder. Even  as he 
swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist,  a glimpse of Strider leaping 

####-out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last  
effort Frodo,  dropping  his sword, slipped  the Ring from  his  finger  and 
closed his right hand tight upon it. 
 

####- 

Chapter 12. Flight to the Ford 

 
 
     When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately.  
He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning br ightly. His 
three companions were bending  over  him.  'What has happened? Where is  the 
pale  king?' he  asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to  hear him speak to  
answer  for  a  while; nor did they  understand  his question.  At length he 
gathered from  Sam that they had seen nothing  but the vague shadowy  shapes 
coming towards them.  Suddenly to his  horror Sam found  that his master had 
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He 
heard  Frodo's  voice, but it seemed to  come from a great distance, or from 
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they  
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as  if  dead,  face downwards  on the 
grass  with his sword  beneath  him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and 
lay  him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now  a  good while 
ago. 
     Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while  
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out  of the  shadows. They 
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down 
swiftly at his side. 
     'I  am not a Black  Rider,  Sam,' he said  gently, 'nor in league  with 
them. I  have been  trying to discover  something of  their movements; but I 
have  found nothing. I cannot  think  why  they have gone and do  not attack  
again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.' 
     When he heard what Frodo had  to tell, he became full  of concern,  and 
shook his head  and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much 
water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with  it. 
'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!' he said. Then he got up and 
walked  away, and called  Sam to him.  'I think I  understand  things better 
now,' he said in  a low voice.  'There  seem only to  have  been five of the 
enemy. Why they were not all here,  I  don't know;  but I  don't  think they 
expected to  be resisted.  They have drawn off for the  time being. But  not 
far,  I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape.  They 
are  only  waiting,  because  they  think  that   their  purpose  is  almost  
accomplished, and that the  Ring  cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that 

####-they believe  your  master has a deadly  wound that will subdue him to their  
will. We  shall see!' Sam choked with tears. 'Don't  despair!' said Strider. 
'You  must trust  me  now. Your  Frodo is made of sterner  stuff  than I had 
guessed, though Gandalf  hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and 
I think he will  resist the evil power of the wound longer  than his enemies 
expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am 
away!' He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness. 
     Frodo  dozed, though the  pain  of his wound was slowly growing,  and a  
deadly  chill  was spreading  from  his  shoulder to  his arm  and side. His 
friends watched  over him, warming him,  and bathing  his  wound.  The night 
passed  slowly  and wearily.  Dawn was growing in the sky, and the  dell was 
filling with grey light, when Strider at last returned. 
     'Look!' he cried; and stooping he lifted from the  ground a black cloak 
that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem there 
was a slash. 'This was  the stroke of Frodo's sword,' he said. 'The only hurt 
that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but  all blades perish 
that pierce  that  dreadful  King.  More  deadly  to  him  was  the name  of 
Elbereth.' 
     'And  more  deadly to Frodo was this!' He stooped again and lifted up a  
long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw 
that near the end  its edge was notched and  the  point was broken  off. But 
even as he  held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for  
the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only  
the hilt in  Strider's hand. 'Alas!' he  cried. 'It was this accursed  knife 
that gave the wound. Few now have the  skill in  healing to match  such evil  
weapons. But I will do what I can.' 
     He sat down on the  ground, and taking  the dagger -hilt laid it  on his 
knees, and he  sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it 
aside, he turned to Frodo  and in  a soft tone  spoke words the others could 
not catch.  From  the pouch at  his  belt he drew  out the  long leaves of a  
plant. 
     'These  leaves,' he said, 'I have  walked far to  find; for  this plant 
does not grow in the bare hills;  but in the thickets away south of the Road 
I found it in the  dark by the scent of its leaves.' He crushed a leaf in his 
fingers,  and it gave out  a  sweet and pungent fragrance. 'It  is fortunate 
that  I could find it, for it is  a healing plant that the  Men of  the West 
brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they  named it,  and it grows  now sparsely 

####-and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old;  and it is not known 
in the  North, except to some of those who wander in the Wild. It  has great 
virtues, but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be small.' 
     He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. The 
fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their 
minds calmed and cleared. The herb had  also some  power over the wound, for  
Frodo felt the pain   and also the  sense of  frozen cold lessen in his side; 
but the life did not return to his arm, and  he could not  raise or  use his 
hand.  He  bitterly  regretted his  foolishness, and reproached himself  for  
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed 
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he 
would  remain maimed for  life,  and how they would now  manage to  continue 
their journey. He fell too weak to stand. 
     The others were discussing this very question. They  quickly decided to 
leave Weathertop as soon as possible. 'I think now,' said Strider, 'that the 
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here, 
then he  must have been forced to ride away, and  he will not return. In any 
case we are in great peril here after  dark, since the attack of last night, 
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.' 
     As  soon  as  the  daylight  was  full, they had some hurried food  and 
packed. It was impossible for Frodo  to  walk, so  they divided the  greater  
part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo  on the pony. In 
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed 
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an a ffection for its new masters, 
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must  have been very hard for the 
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life. 
     They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the 
Road,  but. it was the  quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed 
fuel; for Strider said  that Frodo must be kept warm,  especially at  night, 
while fire would be some protection  for them all. It  was also his  plan to 
shorten their journey by cutting  across another great loop of the Road: east  
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards. 
     They made  their  way slowly  and  cautiously  round the  south-western 
slopes  of the  hill, and came in a  little while to the  edge of the  Road. 
There was no sign of the Riders. But  even as they were hurrying across they 
heard far away two  cries: a cold voice calling and  a cold voice answering. 
Trembling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay ahead. The 

####-land before them  sloped  away  southwards, but  it was  wild  and pathless; 
bushes and  stunted trees  grew in dense patches with wide barren  spaces in 
between.  The grass was scanty, coarse,  and grey;  and  the leaves  in  the 
thickets were faded and falling. It was  a cheerless land, and their journey 
was slow and gloomy. They spoke  little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart 
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads down, 
and 
their  backs bowed  under  their  burdens.  Even  Strider  seemed  tired and 
heavy-hearted. 
     Before the first day's march was over Frodo's pain began to grow again, 
but he did not speak of it for  a long time. Four  days passed,  without the 
ground or the scene changing much, except that behind them Weathertop 
slowly 
sank,  and  before  them the distant mountains loomed a  little nearer.  Yet 
since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked 
their  flight or followed them.  They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch 
in pairs by night, expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the 
grey night, dimly lit by the cloud-veiled  moon; but they  saw nothing,  and 
heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once  did they 
feel the sense of present  evil that  had assailed them before the attack in 
the dell. It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had already  lost their 
trail again. Perhaps  they  were waiting  to  make  some ambush in  a narrow 
place? 
     At the end of  the fifth day the ground began once more  to rise slowly 
out of the wide  shallow valley into which  they had  descended. Strider now  
turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached 
the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far  ahead a huddle of wooded 
hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round  the  feet  of 
the hills;  and  to  their  right  a  grey river  gleamed  pale in the  thin 
sunshine. In the  distance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley 
half-veiled in mist. 
     "I am  afraid we must  go back  to  the Road  here for  a while,'  said 
Strider.  'We have  now  come to  the  River Hoarwell,  that the Elves  call 
Mitheithel. It  flows down out  of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells  north of 
Rivendell,  and joins  the Loudwater away in the  South.  Some  call  it the 
Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the  Sea. There is 
no way over  it  below  its sources  in the Ettenmoors, except by  the  Last  

####-Bridge on which the Road crosses.' 
     'What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry. 
     'That is Loudwater,  the Bruinen of Rivendell,'  answered Strider. 'The 
Road runs along the edge of  the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the 
Ford of Bruinen. But I have  not yet thought how  we shall cross that water. 
One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last  
Bridge held against us.' 
     Next day, early in  the morning, they came down again to the borders of 
the Road.  Sam  and  Strider  went  forward, but they found no  sign of  any 
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some 
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away 
all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see. 
     They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile 
or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope. 
They dreaded  to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider 
made them take cover  in a  thicket at  the side of the Road, while  he went 
forward to explore. 
     Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he 
said,  'and I wonder very much what that  means. But  I have found something 
very strange.' 
     He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found it 
in  the  mud in  the  middle of the  Bridge,' he said. 'It  is  a beryl,  an 
elf-stone.  Whether it was set  there, or  let fall by chance, I cannot say; 
but  it brings  hope to  me. I will take it as a sign that we may  pass  the 
Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep  to  the Road, without some  clearer  
token.' 
     At once they went on again. They crossed  the Bridge in safety, hearing 
no sound  but  the water  swirling  against its three great  arches. A  mile 
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the 
steep  lands  on  the left of the Road.  Here Strider turned aside, and soon 
they were lost in a sombre  country of dark trees winding among the feet  of 
sullen hills. 
     The hobbits were glad  to leave  the  cheerless lands and the  perilous 
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As 
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here  and  there  upon 
heights  and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls  of stone, and the 
ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo,  who was  not walking, had 

####-time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his  journey 
and the  threatening towers on  the hills north of  the Road, in the country 
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had  happened. Frodo 
guessed that they were  now in the  same  region, and wondered if by  chance 
they would pass near the spot. 
     'Who lives  in this land?'  he asked.  'And  who built these  towers? Is 
this troll-country?' 
     'No!' said Strider. 'Trolls do  not  build. No one lives in  this land. 
Men once dwelt  here, ages ago;  but  none remain  now. They  became an evil 
people, as legends  tell, for they fell under  the shadow of Angmar. But all 
were destroyed  in the war that  brought the North Kingdom to  its  end. But 
that is now so long ago that the hills  have forgotten them, though a shadow  
still lies on the land.' 
     'Where  did you learn  such  tales,  if  all  the  land  is  empty  and 
forgetful?' asked Peregrin. 'The  birds and beasts do not tell tales of that 
son.' 
     'The  heirs  of Elendil do not forget all  things past,'  said Strider; 
'and  many more things than  I can tell are remembered in  Rivendell.'  'Have  
you often  been to Rivendell?' said  Frodo. 'I have,' said Strider. 'I dwelt 
there once, and still I return when I may. 
     There my heart is;  but  it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in the 
fair house of Elrond.' 
     The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way to  
the River Bruinen, but both were  now hidden  from view. The travellers came 
into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark  and silent.  Trees with old 
and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into mounting slopes 
of pine-wood. 
     The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to pick 
their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen trees and tumbled 
rocks. As long as they could they avoided  climbing  for  Frodo's  sake, and 
because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales.  
They had been two days in this country when the weather turned wet. The wind 
began  to blow steadily  out  of  the West and pour the water of the distant 
seas  on the  dark  heads of the hills in fine  drenching rain. By nightfall 
they  were all soaked,  and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get 
any  fire  to burn. The next  day the  hills rose still  higher  and steeper  
before  them, and  they were forced to  turn away  northwards out  of  their 

####-course. Strider seemed to  be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out 
from Weathertop, and their stock of  provisions was beginning to run low. It  
went on raining. 
     That night they camped on  a stony shelf with a rock -wall  behind them, 
in which  there was a shallow cave,  a  mere scoop in the  cliff.  Frodo was 
restless. The  cold and wet had  made his wound more painful  than ever, and 
the ache and sense of deadly chill took  away all sleep.  He lay tossing and 
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks 
of  rock, water  dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling  fall of  a loosened 
stone. He felt that black shapes  were advancing to smother him; but when he 
sat up he saw  nothing but  the back of  Strider  sitting hunched up, smoking 
his pipe, and watching.  He lay down again and passed into an uneasy  dream, 
in  which he  walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire,  but it seemed 
faint  and dim, less clear  than the  tall black shadows that  stood looking 
over the hedge. 
     In  the morning he  woke to  find that the rain had stopped. The clouds 
were still thick,  but they were breaking, and pale strips of  blue appeared 
between them.  The  wind was  shifting  again.  They  did  not start  early.  
Immediately after  their cold  and  comfortless  breakfast Strider  went off 
alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he 
came  back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie 
of the land. 
     When  he returned he was not reassuring.  'We have come too  far to the 
north,' he said, 'and we must find  some way to  turn back southwards again.  
If we  keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north 
of  Rivendell.  That is  troll -country,  and  little known  to  me. We could 
perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but 
it would take  too long,  for I  do not know the way, and our food would not  
last. So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.' 
     The  rest of that day they  spent  scrambling over  rocky  ground. They 
found  a passage between  two  hills that  led them into  a  valley  running 
south-east, the  direction that they wished  to take; but towards the end of 
the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark 
edge  against  the  sky was  broken  into many bare points like teeth  of  a  
blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it. 
     They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before 
long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so  they 

####-often  despaired of  getting their pony up, or  indeed of finding a path for  
themselves, burdened as  they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were 
all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They  had climbed on to  a  
narrow  saddle  between two  higher points, and the  land fell  steeply away 
again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the 
ground shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder  felt 
as if icy claws were  laid upon them.  The trees  and rocks about him seemed 
shadowy and dim. 
     'We  cannot go any further,' said  Merry to Strider. 'I am  afraid this 
has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully  anxious about him. What are we 
to do? Do you think they  will be able to cure him in Rivendell,  if we ever 
get there?' 
     'We shall see,'  answered Strider. 'There is nothing more that I can do 
in  the  wilderness;  and  it is chiefly because of  his wound that I am  so 
anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.' 
     'What is the matter with my  master?' asked Sam in a low voice, looking 
appealingly  at Strider.  'His  wound was small, and it is  already  closed. 
There's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.' 
     'Frodo  has been  touched  by the weapons of  the Enemy,' said Strider, 
'and there is some poison  or evil at work that is beyond my  skill to drive 
out. But do not give up hope, Sam!' 
     Night was cold up on the  high ridge. They lit a small fire  down under 
the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as 
if stone had once been  quarried there. They sat  huddled together. The wind 
blew chill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down moaning 
and  sighing.  Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark  wings 
were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that  sought 
him in all the hollows of the hills.  
     The  morning dawned bright  and fair; the air  was clean, and the light 
pale and clear  in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey 
longed for the  sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light, 
Strider took Merry  with him and went to survey the country from  the height 
to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining  brightly when he 
returned  with more comforting news. They were now going more or less in the 
right direction. If they went on, down the  further side of the ridge,  they 
would have the Mountains on their left. Some way  ahead Strider had caught a  
glimpse  of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from 

####-view, the Road to the  Ford was not far from the River  and  lay on the side 
nearest to them. 
     'We must make for  the  Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find a  
path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the Road is our only 
way to the Ford.' 
     As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed  slowly down 
the southern side  of the ridge; but the way  was much easier  than they had 
expected, for the slope  was  far less steep on  this side, and before  long 
Frodo was able  to  ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an 
unexpected talent  for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many 
jolts as possible. The  spirits of the  party  rose  again. Even  Frodo felt 
better in  the  morning  light, but every  now  and again  a mist seemed  to 
obscure his sight, and he pa ssed his hands over his eyes.  
     Pippin was a little  ahead of the  others. Suddenly he turned round and 
called to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried. 
     When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake: 
     there were clearly  the beginnings of  a  path, that climbed  with many 
windings  out of  the woods  below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In 
places it was  now faint and overgrown,  or choked  with fallen  stones  and 
trees; but at one time it seemed to have been much used.  It was a path made 
by strong arms  and heavy feet. Here and  there old trees  had  been cut  or  
broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way. 
     They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the easiest  
way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they came 
into the dark  woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming 
out  of a belt of fir-trees  it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply 
to the left round the comer  of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came 
to the comer they  looked round and  saw  that the path ran on  over a level 
strip  under the face of a low  cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall 
there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge. 
     Outside the door they all  halted. There was  a  cave  or  rock -chamber  
behind, but  in the gloom  inside nothing  could be  seen. Strider, Sam, and 
Merry  pushing with all  their  strength managed  to open  the door a little 
wider, and then Strider  and Merry  went in. They did not go far, for on the 
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen  near the entrance 
except some great empty jars and broken pots. 
     'Surely  this  is a troll-hole, if ever there  was one!'  said  Pippin. 

####-'Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know  who made the path  -
and 
we had better get off it quick.' 
     'There  is  no  need, I think,'  said  Strider,  coining  out.  'It  is 
certainly a troll-hole,  but it seems  to have  been  long forsaken. I don't 
think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.' 
     The  path  went on again from the door, and turning to the right  again 
across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking 
to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead  with Merry. Sam and 
Strider came behind, one on each side of  Frodo's pony, for the path was now 
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone 
very far  before Pippin came  running back,  fol lowed  by Merry.  They  both 
looked terrified. 
     'There are trolls!' Pippin panted. 'Down in a clearing in the woods not 
far below. We  got a sight of them  through  the tree-trunks.  They are very 
large!' 
     'We  will come and  look at them,' said  Strider,  picking  up a stick. 
Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared. 
     The  sun was now  high, and  it  shone  down through the  half-stripped 
branches of  the  trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches of  light. 
They halted  suddenly  on the  edge,  and  peered  through the  tree-trunks, 
holding their breath. There stood  the trolls: three large  trolls.  One was 
stooping, and the other two stood staring at him. 
     Strider walked forward unconcernedly. 'Get up, old stone!' he said, and 
brok e his stick upon the stooping troll. 
     Nothing happened. There  was a  gasp  of astonishment from the hobbits,  
and then even Frodo laughed. 'Well!' he said.  'We are forgetting our family 
history!  These  must  be the  very  three  that  were  caught  by  Gandalf,  
quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.' 
     'I had no  idea we were  anywhere near the place!' said Pippin. He knew 
the  story well. Bilbo  and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact 
he had  never mor e than half believed  it. Even now he  looked  at the stone 
trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them 
to life again. 
     'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew 
about  trolls,' said Strider. 'It is broad daylight with  a bright sun,  and 
yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale  of live trolls waiting for  

####-us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an 
old bird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament  for a  
live troll!' 
     They  all laughed.  Frodo felt  his spirits  reviving: the reminder  of 
Bilbo's  first successful adventure  was  heartening. The sun, too, was warm 
and comforting, and the mist before his  eyes seemed to be lifting a little. 
They rested for some time in the glade,  and took  their  mid-day meal right 
under the shadow of the trolls' large legs. 
     'Won't somebody give  us  a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' said 
Merry, when they had finished. 'We haven't ha d a song or a tale for days.' 
     'Not since  Weathertop,' said Frodo. The  others looked at him.  'Don't  
worry about me!' he added. 'I  feel much  better, but I  don't think I could 
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.' 
     'Come on,  Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more  stored in your head than you  
let on about.' 
     'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain't  
what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But 
these old images here  brought it to my mind.' Standing  up,  with his hands 
behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune. 
     Troll sat alone on his seat of stone, 
     And munched and mumbled a bare old bone; 
     For many a year he had gnawed it near, 
     For meat was hard to come by. 
     Done by! Gum by! 
     In a case in the hills he dwelt alone, 
     And meat was hard to come by. 
 
     Up came Tom with his big boots on. 
     Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon? 
     For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim, 
     As should be a -lyin' in graveyard. 
     Caveyard! Paveyard! 
     This many a year has Tim been gone, 
     And I thought he were lyin' in graveyard.' 
 
     'My lad,' said Troll, 'this bone I stole. 
     But what be bones that lie in a  hole? 

####-     Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o' lead, 
     Afore I found his shinbone. 
     Tinbone! Thinbone! 
     He can spare a share for a poor old troll, 
     For he don't need his shinbone.' 
 
     Said Tom: 'I don't see why the likes o' thee 
     Without axin' leave should go makin' free 
     With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin; 
     So hand the old bone over! 
     Rover! Trover! 
     Though dead he be, it belongs to he; 
     So hand the old bone over!'  
 
     'For a couple o' pins,' says Troll, and grins, 
     'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins. 
     A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet! 
     I'll try my teeth on thee now.  
     Hee now! See now! 
     I'm tired o' gnawing old bones and skins; 
     I've a mind to dine on thee now.' 
 
     But just as he thought his dinner was caught, 
     He found his hands had hold of naught. 
     Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind 
     And gave him the boot to larn him. 
     Warn him! Darn him! 
     A bump o' the boot on the seat, Tom thought, 
     Would be the way to larn him. 
 
     But harder than stone is the flesh and bone 
     Of a troll that sits in the hills alone. 
     As well set your boot to the mountain's root, 
     For the seat of a troll don't feel it. 
     Peel it! Heal it! 
     Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan, 
     And he knew his toes could feel it. 

####- 
     Tom's leg is game, since home he came, 
     And his bootless foot is lasting lame; 
     But Troll don't care, and he's still there 
     With the bone he boned from its owner. 
     Doner! Boner! 
     Troll's old seat is still the same, 
     And the bone he boned from its owner! 
     'Well, that's a warning to  us all!' laughed Merry. 'It  is as well you  
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!' 
     'Where did you come  by  tha t, Sam?' asked Pippin.  'I've  never  heard 
those words before.' 
     Sam  muttered  something  inaudible. 'It's  out of  his  own  head,  of 
course,'  said Frodo. 'I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.  
First he was a conspirator, now he's a  jester.  He'll end up  by becoming a  
wizard - or a warrior!' 
     'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!' 
     In  the afternoon  they went  on  down  the  woods. They were  probably 
following the very track  that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many 
years before.  After a  few miles they came  out on the top  of a high  bank  
above the  Road. At this point  the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in 
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and 
winding eastward among woods and heather -covered slopes towards the Ford 
and 
the  Mountains.  Not far  down the bank Strider pointed out a  stone in  the 
grass.  On  it roughly  cut  and  now  much weathered  could  still be  seen 
dwarf-runes and secret marks. 
     'There!' said  Merry.  'That  must be the stone  that marked  the place 
where the  trolls' gold  was  hidden.  How much is  left of Bilbo's share, I 
wonder, Frodo?' 
     Frodo looked at the stone,  and wished that  Bilbo had brought home  no 
treasure more perilous, nor  less easy to pan with. 'None  at all,' he said. 
'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it 
came from robbers.' 
     The Road lay quiet under the long  shadows of early  evening. There was 
no sign of any  other  travellers  to be  seen. As  there  was now no  other  
possible course for them to  take,  they climbed down  the bank, and turning 

####-left went off  as  fast as they could.  Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off 
the  light  of the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to  meet them 
from the mountains ahead. 
     They were beginning  to look out  for a place  off the Road, where they 
could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that  brought  sudden fear 
back  into their hearts: the  noise of  hoofs behind them. They looked back, 
but they could not see far because of  the many windings and rollings of the  
Road. As quickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten way and up into 
the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, u ntil they came 
to a small patch of thick-growing hazels.  As they peered out from among the 
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and  grey in  the failing light, some 
thirty feel  below them. The sound of hoofs  drew  nearer.  They were  going  
fast, with a light clippety-clippely-clip. Then faintly,  as if it was blown 
away from  them by the breeze,  they seemed  to catch a dim  ringing, as  of 
small bells tinkling. 
     'That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!' said Frodo, listening 
intently. The  other  hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not,  but they all 
remained  full of suspicion.  They had been in  fear of pursuit for  so long 
that any sound from  behind seemed ominous and  unfriendly. But Strider  was 
now leaning forward, stooped to the  ground, with a  hand to  his ear, and a  
look of joy on his face. 
     The light faded, and  the leaves on the bushes  rustled softly. Clearer  
and nearer  now the bells jingled, and clippety -clip  came the quick trotting 
feet. Suddenly into view below came a white  horse, gleaming in the shadows,  
running swiftly. In the dusk its  headstall flickered and flashed,  as if it 
were studded with gems  like living stars. The rider's cloak streamed behind 
him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in  the 
wind of his  speed. To  Frodo it  appeared  that a  white  light was shining 
through the form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil. 
     Strider sprang from hiding and  dashed  down  towards the Road, leaping 
with a cry through  the heather; but even before he  had moved or called, the 
rider  had  reined in  his horse and halted, looking  up towards the thicket 
where  they stood. When he saw  Strider, he dismounted and  ran to meet  him 
calling out: Ai na vedui D®nadan! Mae govannen! His speech and clear 
ringing 
voice left no doubt in their hearts:  the rider  was  of the Elven-folk.  No 
others that dwelt in the wide  world had voices so  fair  to hear. But there 

####-seemed to be  a note of haste or fear  in his call, and they saw tha t he was 
now speaking quickly and urgently to Strider. 
     Soon Strider  beckoned  to them,  and  the hobbits left  the bushes and 
hurried  down  to the Road. 'This is  Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of 
Elrond,' said Strider. 
     'Hail, and well met  at last!' said the Elf-lord to Frodo. 'I  was sent 
from  Rivendell to look  for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the 
road.' 
     'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?' cried Frodo joyfully. 
     'No.  He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered 
Glorfindel.  'Elrond received news that  troubled him.  Some of my  kindred,  
journeying  in  your land  beyond the  Baranduin,* learned  that things were 
amiss, and sent  messages as swiftly as they could. They  said that the Nine 
were abroad,  and  that  you  were  astray bearing a  great  burden  without 
guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that 
can ride openly  against  the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond  sent out 
north,  west, and south.  It was thought  that you  might  turn far aside to 
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness.  
     'It  was  my  lot  to  take the Road,  and  I  came to  the  Bridge  of 
Mitheithel, and  left a  token  there, nigh  on seven days ago. Three of the 
servants of  Sauron were upon the  Bridge, but  they withdrew  and I pursued 
them westward. I came also  upon two others, but they turned away southward. 
Since then I have  searched  for your  trail. Two days  ago I found  it, and 
followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the 
hills again. But come! There is no time for further news. Since you are here 
we must  risk the peril of  the Road and go. There  are five behind us,  and 
when  they find your trail upon the Road  they will   ride after us  like the 
wind.  And they are not all. Where the  other four may be, I  do not know. I 
fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us.' 
     While Glorfindel was speaking  the  shades of evening  deepened.  Frodo 
felt a great weariness come over him. Ever  since the sun began to  sink the 
mist before his eyes had  darkened,  and he  felt  that a  shadow was coming 
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt  
cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm. 
     'My master  is  sick and  wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He  can't go  on 
riding after nightfall. He needs rest.' 
     Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently 

####-in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety. 
     Briefly Strider told of the attack  on their camp under Weathertop, and 
of  the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it 
to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he  took  it, but he looked  intently at 
it. 
     'There  are evil things written  on  this hilt,' he said; 'though maybe 
your  eyes  cannot see  them.  Keep it, Aragorn,  till we reach the house of 
Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may! Alas! the wounds of 
this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will do what I can -  but all the 
more do I urge you now to go on without rest.' 
     He searched the  wound on Frodo's shoulder with  his  fingers, and  his 
face grew graver, as  if what he learned disquieted  him. But Frodo felt the 
chill lessen in  his  side  and arm;  a little  warmth crept  down from  his 
shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The  dusk of evening  seemed  
to grow lighter  about him, as if  a cloud  had been  withdrawn.  He saw his  
friends'  faces more clearly  again, and a  measure of new hope and strength 
returned. 
     'You  shall  ride my  horse,'  said  Glorfindel.  'I will  shorten  the 
stirrups  up to the saddle-skins, and  you must sit as tight as you can. But 
you need not fear: my horse  will not let any rider  fall that I command him 
to bear. His pace is light and smooth;  and if  danger presses  too near, he 
will  bear  you away with a  speed that even  the black steeds of  the enemy 
cannot rival.' 
     'No, he will not!' said  Frodo. 'I  shall  not ride him, if I am to  be 
carried off  to  Rivendell  or anywhere else, leaving  my friends behind  in 
danger.' 
     Glorfindel smiled. 'I doubt very much,' he said, 'if your friends would 
be  in danger if you were  not  with them! The pursuit  would follow you and 
leave  us in  peace, I  think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that 
brings us all in peril.' 
     To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's 
white  horse.  The pony  was laden instead with a great part  of the others' 
burdens, so that they   now marched lighter, and  for a time made good speed; 
but the hobbits  began  to find it hard to keep up  with the swift  tireless 
feet of the Elf.  On he led them, into the  mouth of darkness,  and still on 
under the deep clouded night. There was neither  star nor moon. Not until the  
grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were  by that 

####-time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and  even Strider seemed  by the  
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream. 
     They  cast  themselves  down  in  the  heather  a  few  yards  from the 
road-side,  and  fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to  have closed 
their eyes when Glorfindel, who  had set himself to watch  while they slept, 
awoke  them again.  The sun had  now climbed far into the  morning, and  the 
clouds and mists of the night were gone. 
     'Drink  this!'  said  Glorfindel  to  them, pouring for  each in turn a  
little liquor from his silver -studded flask  of leather.  It  was  clear  as 
spring  water and  had no taste, and it did not feel either  cool or warm in 
the mouth; but  strength  and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs  as 
they  drank  it. Eaten after that draught the stale  bread  and dried  fruit 
(which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better  
than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done. 
     They had rested rather less than five hours when they  took to the Road 
again. Glorfindel  still  urged them  on, and  only allowed two brief  halts 
during the day's  march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before 
nightfall, and  came  to  a  point where the Road bent  right  and  ran down 
towards the  bottom of the valley,  now making  straight for the Bruinen. So  
far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or  
hear; but often  Glorfindel would  halt and  listen  for  a moment, if  they 
lagged behind,  and a look of anxiety  clouded  his face. Once or  twice  he 
spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue. 
     But  however  anxious  their  guides might be,  it  was plain  that the 
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy with 
weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs.  Frodo's 
pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows  of 
ghostly grey.  He almost welcomed the coming of  night,  for  then the world 
seemed less pale and empty. 
     The  hobbits  were still  weary,  when  they  set out  again early next 
morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and 
they 
hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage. 
     'Our  peril  will  be  greatest just  ere  we  reach the  river,'  said 
Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind  us,  
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.' 
     The  Road  was still running steadily downhill,  and there  was now  in 

####-places much  grass  at either side, in which  the  hobbits walked when  they 
could, to ease  their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came to a  place 
where the  Road went  suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and 
then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes 
ran  along as they hurried  forward; and there seemed to  be a sound of many  
footfalls following their own.  All at once, as if through a  gate of light, 
the Road ran  out again from the end of the tunnel into  the open.  There at 
the bottom  of a sharp incline  they saw before  them a long  flat mile, and 
beyond that  the  Ford of Rivendell. On  the  further side was a steep brown 
bank,  threaded  by  a  winding  path;  and behind  that the tall  mountains 
climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky. 
     There was still an  echo as  of following feet  in  the cutting   behind 
them;  a  rushing noise as  if  a wind were  rising and pouring  through the 
branches of the  pines. One moment Glorfindel turned  and  listened, then he 
sprang forward with a loud cry. 
     'Fly!' he called. 'Fly! The enemy is upon us!' 
     The white  horse  leaped  forward.  The  hobbits ran  down  the  slope. 
Glorfindel and  Strider followed  as  rear -guard.  They were only  half  way 
across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of 
the gate in the  trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined 
his horse  in, and halted,  swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and 
then another; then again two more. 
     'Ride forward! Ride!' cried Glorfindel to Frodo. 
     He did not obey at  once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checking 
the horse to  a  walk,  he turned and looked  back. The Riders seemed to sit 
upon  their  great steeds  like  threatening  statues  upon a hill, dark and 
solid, while all the woods and land about them  receded as  if into a  mist. 
Suddenly he knew  in  his heart that they were  silently commanding  him  to 
wait. Then at  once  fear  and hatred awoke in him. His hand left the bridle 
and gripped the hilt of his sword, and with a red flash he drew it. 
     'Ride on! Ride on!' cried Glorfindel, and then loud and clear he called 
to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth! 
     At once the  white horse sprang away  and  sped like the wind along the 
last lap of  the Road. At the same moment the  black horses leaped  down the 
hill in pursuit, and from  the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had 
heard filling  the woods with  horror in the Eastfarthing  far away.  It was 
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends  out from the trees and 

####-rocks  away  on the left four other  Riders came flying.  Two  rode  towards 
Frodo: two  galloped madly towards  the Ford  to  cut  off  his escape. They 
seemed to him to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as 
their courses converged with his.  
     Frodo looked  back for  a moment over  his shoulder. He could no longer  
see  his friends. The Riders  behind  were  falling  back:  even their great 
steeds  were no match  in  speed for the  white elf-horse of  Glorfindel. He 
looked forward again, and hope fa ded. There seemed no chance of reaching the 
Ford before he  was cut off by  the others that had lain in ambush. He could 
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black  
cloaks, and they were robed in  white and  grey. Swords were  naked in their  
pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes  glittered,  and they 
called to him with fell voices.  
     Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No 
cry came from him. He shut his eyes  and clung to the horse's mane. The wind 
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A 
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a  
flash of  white fire, the  elf-horse  speeding as  if on wings, passed right 
before the face of the foremost Rider. 
     Frodo heard  the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the 
quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony 
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford. 
     But the pursuers were close behind. At  the  top of  the bank the horse 
halted and turned  about neighing  fiercely. There were  Nine  Riders at the 
water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before  the  threat  of their 
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would  prevent them from crossing as 
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over  
the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge  of Rivendell, if once the 
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that  he was commanded urgently to halt.  
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse. 
     Suddenly the foremost  Rider  spurred  his horse forward. It checked at 
the water and  reared  up.  With  a  great  effort  Frodo  sat  upright  and 
brandished his sword. 
     'Go back!' he cried. 'Go  back to  the Land of Mordor, and follow me no 
more! '  His voice sounded  thin and shrill  in his  own  ears.  The  Riders 
halted, but Frodo had not  the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him 
with  a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To 

####-Mordor we will take you!' 
     'Go back!' he whispered. 
     'The Ring! The  Ring!'  they cried with  deadly voices; and immediately 
their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two 
others. 
     'By Elbereth  and L®thien  the Fair,' said Frodo  with  a last  effort, 
lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!' 
     Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in 
his  stirrups, and raised up his hand.  Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his 
tongue  cleave to  his mouth,  and  his heart labouring. His sword broke and  
fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost  
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore. 
     At that moment there  came a roaring and  a rushing: a  noise  of  loud 
waters rolling many stones. Dimly  Frodo saw the river below him  rise,  and 
down along its course there  came a  plumed cavalry of  waves.  White flames 
seemed to Frodo to  flicker on their crests  and he half fancied that he saw 
amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three 
Riders  that  were still in  the midst of  the  Ford were  overwhelmed: they 
disappeared, buried su ddenly under angry  foam.  Those that were behind drew 
back in dismay. 
     With his  last failing senses Frodo  heard cries,  and it seemed to him 
that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure 
of white light;  and behind it ran small shadowy forms  waving flames,  that 
flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world. 
     The  black  horses were  filled  with madness, and leaping  forward  in 
terror  they bore their riders  into the rushing flood. Their piercing cries 
were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo 
felt himself  falling,  and  the  roaring and  confusion seemed  to rise and 
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more. 
 

####-* BOOK II *  

 
 

Chapter 1. Many Meetings 

 
 
     Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that  he 
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge 
of memory. Or  perhaps he  had been ill? But  the ceiling looked strange; it 
was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay  a little while longer  
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the  sound of a  
waterfall. 
     `Where am  I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the  ceiling. 'In 
the  House of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in  the morning.' said  a voice. 
`It is the morning of October the twenty -fourth, if you want to know.' 
     `Gandalf!'  cried  Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting 
in a chair by the open window.  
     `Yes,' he said, `I am here.  And you  are lucky  to be here, too, after  
all the absurd  things you  have done since  you left home.' Frodo lay  down 
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did 
not think he would get the better of  an argument.  He  was fully awake now,  
and  the memory of  his  journey  was returning: the  disastrous `short cut' 
through the Old Forest the `accident' at The Prancing Pony;  and his madness 
in putting  on the Ring  in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking 
of all these  things and trying  in  vain to  bring  his memory down to  his 
arriving  in  Rivendell, there  was a long  silence, broken only by the soft  
puffs of Gandalf's pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the window.  
     'Where's Sam?' Frodo asked at length. 'And are the others all right?' 
     'Yes, they are  all  safe  and sound,' answered Gandalf.  `Sam was here 
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.' 
     `What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. `It all seemed so dim somehow; 
and it still does.' 
     'Yes,  it  would.  You were beginning to fade,' answered  Gandalf. 'The 
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you  would have  
been 
beyond  our aid.  But you have some strength in you, my dear  hobbit! As you 
showed in the  Barrow. That was touch and  go: perhaps  the  most  dangerous 

####-moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.' 
     'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. `I have not spoken 
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards 
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?' 
     'You have talked long  in your sleep, Frodo,' said Gandalf gently, 'and 
it  has not been hard  for me to  read  your mind and memory. Do not  worry! 
Though I said  "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and 
of the others. It is  no small  feat to have come so far,  and  through such 
dangers, still bearing the Ring.' 
     'We should  never  have done it  without Strider,' said Frodo. `But  we 
needed you. I did not know what to do without you.' 
     'I was delayed,'  said Gandalf, `and that  nearly proved our  ruin. And 
yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.' 
     'I wish you would tell me what happened!' 
     'All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything 
today, by Elrond's orders.' 
     `But  talking would stop me thinking and wondering,  which are quite as 
tiring,' said Frodo.  'I am wide awake  now, and  I remember so many  things 
that want explaining. Why  were you delayed?  You  ought to tell me that  at 
least.' 
     'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have 
a Council, as soon as you are  well enough. At the  moment  I will only  say 
that I was held captive.' 
     'You?' cried Frodo. 
     'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,'  said the wizard solemnly.  'There are many 
powers  in  the world,  for good  or for evil. Some are  greater  than I am. 
Against  some  I  have not  yet been measured. But my  time  is  coming. The 
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!' 
     `Then you knew of the Riders already -before I met them?' 
     'Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the Black  
Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings.  But 
I did not know  that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at 
once. I heard news  of them only after  I left you in  June; but that  story 
must wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.' 
     'Yes,'  said Frodo, `it was Strider that saved  us. Yet I was afraid of 
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we 
met Glorfindel.' 

####-     Gandalf smiled. `I have heard all about  Sam,' he said. 'He has no more 
doubts now.' 
     'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well, 
fond is not the right word.  I mean he is dear to me; though he  is strange, 
and grim  at times. In fact, he reminds  me often of you. I didn't know that 
any of the Big People were  like that.  I thought, well, that  they were just 
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked 
like  Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except 
perhaps the Breelanders.' 
     `You  don't know  much  even  about them, if you  think old Barliman is 
stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his  own ground. He thinks less 
than  he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall  in time (as 
they say in Bree). But there are few left in  Middle-earth  like Aragorn son 
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It 
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.' 
     'Do  you  really  mean that  Strider is one  of the people of  the  old 
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder.  `I thought  they had all vanished long ago. I 
thought he was only a Ranger.' 
     'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. `My dear Frodo,  that  is just what the 
Rangers are: the last  remnant in the North  of the great people, the Men of 
the  West.  They have helped  me  before; and I shall need their help in the 
days  to come;  for we  have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is  not yet  at 
rest.' 
     'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But  so far my  only thought has been  to 
get here; and  I  hope I  shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant 
just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has 
been as much as I want.' 
     He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have 
been reckoning,' he said, `and I can't bring  the  total up  to October  the 
twenty-fourth. It ought to  be  the  twenty-first. We  must have reached the 
Ford by the twentieth.' 
     'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.  
`How do the side and shou lder feel now?' 
     'I don't know.' Frodo  answered. 'They don't feel at all: which  is  an 
improvement, but'--he made  an  effort--'I can move my  arm again a  little. 
Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left  
hand with  his right. 

####-     `Good!'  said  Gandalf.  `It is  mending  fast. You will soon be  sound 
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were 
brought in.' 
     'Days?' said Frodo. 
     `Well, four nights and three days,  to be  exact. The Elves brought you  
from this where you lost  count.  We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has 
hardly left  your  side, day or night, except to run  messages. Elrond is  a  
master of healing, but the weapons of  our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the 
truth, I had very little hope; for  I suspected that there was some fragment 
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last  
night.  Then Elrond  removed a  splinter. It  was deeply  buried. and it was 
working inwards.' 
     Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife  with notched  blade  that 
had vanished in Strider's  hands. `Don't be alarmed!' said Gandalf.  `It  is 
gone  now.  It  has  been  melted.  And  it  seems  that  Hobbits fade  very 
reluctantly.  I  have known strong  warriors of  the Big  People  who  would 
quickly have  been overcome by  that splinter, which you bore  for seventeen 
days.' 
     `What would they have done  to me?' asked Frodo. `What  were the Riders 
trying to do?' 
     'They tried to pierce your heart with a  Morgul-knife  which remains in 
the wound. If they had succeeded, you would  have become like they are, only 
weaker and  under their  command. You  would have became a wraith under  
the 
dominion of  the Dark Lord;  and he would have tormented you   for trying  to 
keep his Ring,  if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it 
and seeing it on his hand.' 
     'Thank goodness  I  did  not  realize the horrible danger!' said  Frodo 
faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had k nown more, I should 
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!' 
     'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf,  `not  to mention 
courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced; 
and that  was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow 
shave, so to  speak. You were in gravest peril while you  wore the Ring, for  
then you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they might have  seized  
you. You could see them, and they could see you. ' 
     `I know,' said Frodo.  `They were terrible to behold! But why  could we 

####-all see their horses?' 
     `Because  they are real horses; just as the black robes are real  robes 
that they wear to give shape  to their  nothingness when  they have dealings 
with the living.' 
     `Then  why do these black  horses endure such riders? All other animals 
are terrified when  they draw  near, even  the elf-horse of  Glorfindel. The 
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.' 
     `Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord 
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are orcs and 
trolls, there are wargs  and werewolves; and there have been  and  still are 
many Men,  warriors and kings,  that walk alive under  the  Sun, and yet are 
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.' 
     `What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?' 
     `Yes,  at present,  until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear the 
Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but  never aga in will they listen to 
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live  still some of his  chief 
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They  
do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the  Blessed  Realm 
live at  once in both worlds, and against both the  Seen and the Unseen they 
have great power.' 
     'I  thought that I saw  a white figure that shone and did not  grow dim 
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?' 
     'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the 
mighty  of  the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord  of a  house of princes. Indeed 
there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while: 
and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind 
in the Shire. But all  such places will soon  become islands under siege, if 
things  go  on  as they are going. The Dark  Lord is  putting forth all  his 
strength. 
     `Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin. while 
his beard went  stiff and straight like bristling wire, `we must keep up our 
courage. You will  soon be  well, if I do not talk you  to death. You are in 
Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.' 
     'I haven't any courage to  keep up,'  said Frodo, `but I am not worried 
at  the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell  me the end of the  
affair at the  Ford, as I  keep on asking,  and I shall be  content  for the 
present. After that  I  shall have  another sleep, I  think; but I shan't be 

####-able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.' 
     Gandalf moved  his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo. 
The colour  had come  back to his face, and his  eyes were clear, and  fully 
awake  and aware. He was smiling,  and there seemed to be  little wrong with 
him. But to the wizard's eye there was a faint change just a hint as it were 
of transparency,  about  him, and especially  about  the left  hand that lay 
outside upon the coverlet. 
     `Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. `He is not half 
through  yet,  and to what  he  will  come in the  end  not even  Elrond can 
foretell. Not  to evil, I think. He may become  like a glass filled  with  a  
clear light for eyes to see that can.' 
     `You look splendid,' he  said aloud. `I  will risk a brief tale without 
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again. 
This is what happened, as far  as I can gather. The Riders made straight for  
you, as soon as you fled. They did not need the guidance of their horses any  
longer: you  had become visible to  them, being already on the threshold  of 
their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off the 
road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save 
you,  if  the white horse could  not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, 
and too many to oppose.  On foot even  Glorfindel and Aragorn together could 
not with stand all the Nine at once. 
     `When the Ringwraiths  swept  by, your friends ran up behind.  Close to 
the Ford  there is a small hollow  beside  the  road masked by a few stunted 
trees.  There they hastily  kindled fire; for  Glorfindel knew that a  flood 
would come down, if  the Riders  tried  to cross,  and then he would have to 
deal with any that were left on his side of the river. The moment the  flood 
appeared, he rushed  out, followed by  Aragorn and the. others  with flaming  
brands. Caught between  fire and water, and seeing  an Elf-lord revealed  in 
his wrath, they were dismayed, and their  horses were stricken with madness. 
Three were  carried away by the first assault  of the flood; the others were 
now hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.' 
     'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo. 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Their horses must have perished,  and without them 
they  are crippled.  But  the  Ringwraiths  themselves cannot  be  so easily 
destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your 
friends crossed after the  flood had passed; and they found you lying on your  
face at the top of the  bank, with  a broken sword under you. The horse  was 

####-standing guard beside you. You were  pale and cold, and they feared that you 
were  dead,  or  worse.  Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards 
Rivendell.' 
     `Who made the flood?' asked Frodo. 
     'Elrond  commanded it,' answered  Gandalf. `The river of this valley is 
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the 
Ford.  As soon as the  captain  of the Ringwraiths rode into  the  water the 
flood was released.  If I may say so, I added a few touches of  my  own: you  
may  not have noticed, but some of the waves  took the  form of  great white 
horses with shining  white riders; and there wer e many rolling and  grinding 
boulders. For a moment  I was afraid that  we  had let  loose too  fierce  a  
wrath, and the flood would get out of hand  and  wash you all away. There is 
great vigour  in  the  waters  that come down  from the snows  of  the Misty 
Mountains.' 
     `Yes,  it all  comes  back  to  me now,'  said  Frodo:  'the tremendous 
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends  and enemies and all. But 
now we are safe!' 
     Gandalf  looked quickly at Frodo,  but he had shut his  eyes. 'Yes, you  
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to 
celebrate the  victory at the Ford  of Bruinen, and you will all be there in 
places of honour.' 
     'Splendid!' said Frodo. `It is  wonderful  that Elrond, and  Glorfindel 
and such great lords, not to  mention Strider, should take so  much  trouble 
and show me so much kindness.' 
     `Well, there  are many reasons why they should,' said Gandalf, smiling. 
`I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer.  And you  
are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.' 
     `Dear Bilbo!' said Frodo sleepily. `I wonder where he is. I wish he was 
here and could hear  all  about it.  It would have  made  him laugh, The cow 
jumped  over the  Moon!  And  the poor old troll!'  With that he  fell  fast  
asleep. 
     Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea. That house 
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, `a perfect house, whether you like food 
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or 
a  pleasant  mixture  of  them all'.  Merely  to  be  there was  a cure  for  
weariness, fear, and sadness.  
     As the evening drew on, Frodo  woke up again, and he found  that  he no 

####-longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and 
probably  for singing and story-telling  afterwards. He got  out of  bed and 
discovered that his  arm was  already nearly as useful again as it ever  had 
been. He found  laid ready  clean garments  of  green cloth that  fitted him 
excellently. Looking  in a mirror  he  was  startled to see  a  much thinner  
reflection  of  himself than  he remembered: it  looked remarkably like  the 
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping  with his uncle in  the Shire; 
but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully. 
     `Yes, you  have seen a thing or two since  you last  peeped  out  of  a  
looking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!' 
     He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune. 
     At that moment there  was a knock on the door,  and Sam came in. He ran 
to Frodo and took his left hand,  awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it  gently  
and then he blushed and turned hastily away. 
     `Hullo, Sam!' said Frodo. 
     `It's  warm!' said Sam. `Meaning your hand, Mr.  Frodo. It has  felt so 
cold through  the long nights. But glory  and trumpets!'  he cried,  turning 
round again with shining  eyes and dancing  on  the floor. 'It's fine to see 
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were 
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.' 
     'I  am ready,' said Frodo.  'Let's  go  and  look  for the rest  of the 
party!' 
     `I can  take you to them,  sir,' said Sam. `It's a  big house this, and 
very  peculiar. Always a bit more to discover,  and no  knowing  what  you'll 
find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves  here, and Elves there! Some like 
kings, terrible and splendid;  and some  as merry as children. And the music 
and the singing-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening 
since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.' 
     'I know  what you have  been doing,  Sam,' said Frodo,  taking his arm. 
'But you  shall be merry tonight,  and listen to your  heart's content. Come 
on, guide me round the corners!' 
     Sam led him  along several passages and down many steps and out  into a 
high garden above the  steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting 
in a  porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the 
valley below,  but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far 
above. The air was warm. The sound of running  and falling  water  was loud, 
and the evening  was filled with a  faint scent  of trees and flowers, as if 

####-summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens.  
     `Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing  up.  `Here is our noble cousin! Make 
way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!' 
     'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back  of the  porch. `Evil 
things do  not  come into this valley; but all  the same we should not  name 
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of 
Mordor, whose  power is  again stretching out over the world! We are sitting  
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.' 
     `Gandalf  has been saying many cheerful things like that,' said Pippin. 
`He thinks I need keeping in  order.  But it  seems impossible, somehow,  to  
feel  gloomy or depressed in  this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the 
right song for the occasion.' 
     `I feel  like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. `Thou gh  at the moment  I  
feel more like eating and drinking!' 
     `That  will  soon  be cured,'  said  Pippin. `You have shown your usual 
cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.' 
     `More than meal!  A  feast!'  said  Merry. `As soon as Gandalf reported 
that  you were  recovered, the  preparations began.' He  had hardly finished 
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells. 
     The  hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves  for  the  most  
part,  though there wer e a  few guests of other  sorts.  Elrond, as  was his 
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and 
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.  
     Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of 
whom  so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,  
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were 
revealed 
as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other 
two; but his  long  white  hair, his  sweeping silver beard, and  his  broad 
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient  legend. In his aged 
face under  great snowy brows  his dark eyes  were set like coals that could 
leap suddenly into fire. 
     Glorfindel  was tall and straight;  his  hair was of shining gold,  his 
face fair and young and fearless and full  of  joy; his eyes were bright and 
keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and  in his hand was 
strength. 
     The face  of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was 

####-written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark 
as the shadows of twilight, and upon  it  was set  a circlet  of silver; his 
eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of 
stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale 
as  a tried warrior in  the  fulness  of  his strength.  He was the Lord  of 
Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men. 
     In  the  middle of the table, against  the  woven cloths upon the wall, 
there  was a chair under  a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look  upon, 
and so like was she in form of womanhood  to Elrond that Frodo  guessed that 
she was one of his  close kindred. Young she was  and yet not so. The braids 
of her dark  hair were touched  by no frost, her white arms and  clear  face 
were  flawless and smooth,  and the light  of stars was in  her bright eyes,  
grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge 
were in  her  glance, as  of  one  who has known  many things that the years 
bring. Above her brow her head was covered with  a cap of silver lace netted 
with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament 
save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver. 
     So it was  that Frodo saw  her whom few  mortals  had yet seen;  Arwen,  
daughter  of Elrond,  in whom it  was said  that the likeness of L®thien had 
come on earth again; and she was called  Undumiel, for she was  the Evenstar 
of her people. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin,  in Lurien 
beyond  the mountains,  and  was  but  lately  returned to Rivendell  to her  
father's  house.  But  her  brothers, Elladan and  Elrohir,  were  out  upon 
errantry: for  they rode often far  afield with the  Rangers  of  the North, 
forgetting never their mother's torment in the dens of the orcs.  
     Such loveliness  in  living  thing  Frodo had  never  seen  before  nor  
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find  that he 
had a seat at  Elrond's table among all these  folk so high and fair. Though 
he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several  cushions, he felt very 
small, and  rather out of place; but that  feeling quickly passed. The feast  
was  merry and  the food all that his  hunger could desire. It was some time 
before he looked about him again or even turned to his neighbours. 
     He  looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be  allowed to wait 
on his  master, but had been  told that  for this  time he  was  a  guest of 
honour. Frodo could see him  now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper  
end  of  one of  the side-tables close to  the dais. He could see no sign of 
Strider. 

####-     Next to Frodo  on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly 
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was  white, nearly as white as the 
snow-white cloth  of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck  
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him. 
     'Welcome  and well met!'  said the dwarf, turning towards  him. Then he 
actually rose from his seat and bowed. `Gluin at your service,' he said, and 
bowed still lower. 
     'Frodo  Baggins  at  your  service  and  your   family's,'  said  Frodo 
correctly, rising  in surprise and scattering  his cushions. 'Am I right  in 
guessing that you are the  Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the  great 
Thorin Oakenshield?' 
     `Quite  right,'  answered  the dwarf,  gathering up  the  cushions  and 
courteously assist ing  Frodo back  into his seat. 'And I do  not ask, for  I 
have  already been  told that you  are  the  kinsman and adopted heir of our 
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.' 
     `Thank you very much,' said Frodo. 
     'You have had  some very strange  adventures, I hear,'  said  Gluin. 'I  
wonder greatly  what brings  four hobbits  on so long a journey. Nothing like 
it  has happened  since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire 
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?' 
     'I  think  we  will not  speak  of it,  at least not  yet,' said  Frodo 
politely. 
     He guessed that  even in Elrond's house the matter of  the Ring was not 
one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his  troubles for a  
time. 'But  I am  equally  curious,'  he  added,  `to learn what  brings  so 
important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.' 
     Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I  think we will not speak 
yet  of that either. Master  Elrond will summon us all ere long,  I believe, 
and  then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that  may be 
told.' 
     Throughout the  rest  of  the  meal  they talked  together,  but  Frodo 
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring, 
seemed small and far-away and unimportant. while  Gluin had much to tell  of 
events in the northern regions of Wilderland.  Frodo  learned that Grimbeorn 
the Old, son of  Beorn, was now the lord  of  many sturdy men ,  and to their  
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.  
     'lndeed,' said Gluin,  `if it were not for  the  Beornings, the passage 

####-from  Dale  to Rivendell  would long  ago  have become  impossible. They are 
valiant men and keep open  the High Pass  and the Ford of Carrock. But their 
tolls are high,' he added with a shake of his  head;  `and like Beorn of old 
they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty,  and that is much 
in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to  us  as the  Men  of 
Dale. They  are  good  folk,  the Bardings. The  grandson of Bard the Bowman 
rules  them,  Brand son of Bain  son of Bard. He is a  strong king.  and his 
realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.' 
     'And what of your own people?' asked Frodo. 
     `There is much  to tell, good and bad,' said  Gluin; 'yet it  is mostly 
good:  we have so far been fortunate, though  we do not escape the shadow of 
these  times. If you  really  wish  to  hear of us, I will tell  you tidings 
gladly.  But stop  me when  you are  weary!  Dwarves'  tongues  run  on when 
speaking of their handiwork, they say.' 
     And with that  Gluin embarked on a long  account of the doings  of  the 
Dwarf-kingdom.  He  was delighted  to have found  so polite a  listener; for  
Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject, 
though  actually he  soon  got rather lost among the strange names of people 
and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to 
hear that Dbin was  still  King under the  Mountain, and was now old (having 
passed  his two hundred  and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. 
Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies  seven were 
still with him: Dwalin, Gluin, Dori, Nori,  Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur 
was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at 
table, and it took six young dwarves to lift him. 
     'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?' asked Frodo. 
     A shadow passed  over Gluin's face.  `We do not know,' he answered. 'It 
is largely  on account of  Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those 
that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!' 
     Gluin began then  to talk  of the works of  his  people,  telling Frodo 
about their  great  labours in Dale  and under the  Mountain. 'We have  done 
well,' he  said. `But  in  metalwork  we cannot rival  our fathers, many  of 
whose. secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but  we cannot 
again make mail or blade  to match  those  that were  made before the dragon 
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should 
see  the  waterways of Dale,  Frodo, and the fountains, and  the pools!  You  
should  see  the  stone-paved roads  of  many  colours! And  the  halls  and 

####-cavernous streets under the earth with  arches  carved  like trees;  and the 
terraces and  towers upon the Mountain's  sides! Then you would  see that we 
have not been idle.' 
     'I will come and see them, if  ever I can,' said  Frodo. 'How surprised 
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!' 
     Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you 
not?' he asked. 
     `Yes,' answered Frodo. 'I would rather see him than all  the towers and 
palaces in the world.' 
     At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went down 
the hall, and the company followed them in due  order. The doors were thrown 
open, and they went across a  wide passage and through other doors, and came 
into a further hall.  In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in 
a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side. 
     Frodo found himself  walking with  Gandalf. `This  is the Hall of Fire' 
said the wizard.  `Here you will hear many songs and  tales-if you  can keep 
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people 
come here who wish for peace,  and thought. There is always a fire here, all  
the year round, but there is little other light.' 
     As Elrond entered and  went towards  the seat prepared for  him, elvish 
minstrels began to  make sweet  music.  Slowly  the hall  filled,  and Frodo 
looked  with delight upon  the many  fair faces that were gathered together; 
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in  their hair. Suddenly 
he noticed, not far from the further  end of  the fire, a small dark  figure 
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on  the 
ground was a drinking-cup  and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was 
ill 
(if people were ever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable  to  come to the 
feast. His head seemed sunk  in sleep on  his breast, and a fold of his dark 
cloak was drawn over his face. 
     Elrond wen t forward and stood beside the  silent figure. 'Awake  little 
master.  he  said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him. 
'Now  at last  the hour has come that you have wished  for, Frodo,' he said. 
`Here is a friend that you have long missed.' 
     The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face. 
     `Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward. 
     `Hullo, Frodo my  lad!' said Bilbo.  `So  you have got here at  last. I 

####-hoped you would manage it. Well,  well! So  all this  feasting  is  in  your 
honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?' 
     'Why weren't  you there?' cried Frodo.  `And why haven't I been allowed 
to see you before?' 
     `Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by 
your  side with Sam each day. But as for  the feast` I don't go in  for such 
things much now. And I had something else to do.' 
     `What were you doing?' 
     `Why, sitting and thinking.  I do  a lot of that  nowadays, and this is 
the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!' he said, cocking an 
eye at Elrond.  There was a  bright  twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness 
that Frodo could see. `Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want 
to  know,  you  have  all come  out from your  feast too  soon, and  you have 
disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck  over a line  or  
two, and was thinking  about them; but  now I don't suppose I shall ever get  
them right.  There will  be such a deal of singing  that  the  ideas wi ll be 
driven clean out  of my head.  I  shall have to get my friend the D®nadan to 
help me. Where is he?' 
     Elrond laughed. `He  shall  be found,' he  said. `Then you two shall go 
into a corner  and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before 
we end our merrymaking.' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though 
none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast. 
     In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quickly 
and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious 
of the mirth and music in the hall about them.  Bilbo had not much to say of 
himself. When  he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the 
Road or in the country on either side;  but  somehow  he had steered all the 
time towards Rivendell. `I got here without  much adventure,' he  said, `and 
after  a rest I went on with  the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't  
travel again.  Old  Balin had gone away. Then I came  back  here, and here I  
have been. I have done this and that. I have  written some more of my  book. 
And, of course, I make  up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to 
please  me,  I think; for, of  course,  they aren't really  good  enough for  
Rivendell. And I listen and  I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just  
is. A remarkable place altogether. 
     `I  hear  all kinds of  news,  from  over the Mountains, and out of the 
South,  but  hardly  anything  from the Shire.  I heard  about  the Ring, of 

####-course. Gandalf has been here often. Not  that he has told me a  great deal, 
he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me 
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It  is a pity that 
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I  could  have brought  the thing here 
myself  long ago without  so much trouble. I have  thought several  times of 
going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they  would not let 
me: Gandalf and Elrond,  I  mean.  They seemed  to  think that the Enemy was 
looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught 
me 
tottering about in the Wild. 
     'And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on,  Bilbo. It would do no good 
to  you or to others, if you tried to meddle  with it  again." Odd  sort  of 
remark,  just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after  you, so I  let 
things be. I am frightfully glad to  see  you safe and sound.' He paused and 
looked at Frodo doubtfully. 
     `Have  you got it here?' he asked  in a whisper. `I  ca n't help feeling 
curious,  you know, after all I've heard. I  should very much like  just  to 
peep at it again.' 
     `Yes, I've  got  it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. `It 
looks just the same as ever it did.' 
     `Well, I should just lik e to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo. 
     When he had dressed, Frodo found  that while he slept the Ring had been 
hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out. 
Bilbo  put  out  his hand.  But Frodo  quickly drew  back the Ring.  To  his 
distress  and  amazement he found that he was no  longer looking at Bilbo; a  
shadow seemed to  have fallen between them, and through it he found  himself 
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.  
He felt a desire to strike him. 
     The music  and singing round them seemed  to falter and a silence fell. 
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. `I  
understand  now,' he said. `Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have  come in 
for this burden: sorry about everything.  Don't adventures ever have an end?  
I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't  
be helped. I wonder if it's any good  trying  to finish my  book? But  don't 
let's  worry about it now-let 's have some real News! Tell  me all about  the 
Shire!' 
     Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly  a  shred 

####-of  memory.  The light  and music  of  Rivendell was about  him again. Bilbo 
smiled  and laughed happily. Every  item  of news  from the Shire that Frodo 
could  tell-aided and corrected now and again  by  Sam-was  of the  greatest  
interest to  him, from the felling of  the least tree to the  pranks of  the 
smallest child  in  Hobbiton. They were so deep in  the doings  of  the Four 
Farthings that they did not  notice  the arrival of a man clad in dark green 
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile. 
     Suddenly  Bilbo  looked  up. 'Ah, there you are  at last,  D®nadan!' he 
cried. 
     `Strider!' said Frodo. `You seem to have a lot of names.' 
     `Well, Strider is one that I haven't heard before, anyway,' said Bilbo. 
`What do you call him that for?' 
     `They call me that in Bree,' said Strider laughing, 'and that is how  I 
was introduced to him.' 
     `And why do you call him D®nadan?' asked Frodo. 
     `The D®nadan,' said Bilbo. `He is often called that here. But I thought 
you  knew  enough  Elvish  at  least to  know  d®n-udan: Man  of  the  West, 
N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!' He turned to Strider. 
     `Where have you been, my friend? Why weren't you at the feast? The Lady 
Arwen was there.' 
     Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. `I  know,'  he said. 'But often I 
must put  mirth aside. Elladan  and Elrohir  have returned  out  of the Wild 
unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.' 
     `Well, my  dear fellow,' said  Bilbo, `now you've heard the news, can't  
you spare me  a moment?  I want your help in  something urgent.  Elrond says 
this song of mine is to be finished  before the end of the evening, and I am 
stuck. Let's go off into a corner and polish it up!' 
     Strider smiled. `Come then!' he said. `Let me hear it!' 
     Frodo  was left  to himself  for a while. for Sam had fallen asleep. He 
was  alone and felt rather forlorn`  although  all  about  him  the  folk of 
Rivendell were gathered. But  those near  him were silent,  intent upon  the 
music of the voices and the instruments. and they  gave no heed to  anything 
else. Frodo began to listen. 
     At first the beauty of the  melodies  and  of  the interwoven  words in 
elven-tongues, even though he understood  them little` held him in  a spell, 
as soon as  he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took  
shape, and  visions of  far la nds  and  bright things that he had  never yet 

####-imagined  opened out before him;  and the firelit  hall became like a golden 
mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the  world. Then the 
enchantment  became more and more dreamlike, until  he  felt  that an endless 
river of  swelling gold  and  silver was flowing over him, too multitudinous 
for its  pattern to be comprehended;  it  became part of  the throbbing  air 
about him, and  it  drenched and  drowned him. Swiftly  he  sank  under  its 
shining weight into a deep realm of sleep. 
     There  he wandered long in a dream of  music  that turned  into running 
water, and  then suddenly into a  voice. It seemed  to be the voice of Bilbo 
chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words. 
     Edrendil was a mariner 
     that tarried in Arvernien; 
     he built a boat of timber felled 
     in Nimbrethil to journey in; 
     her sails he wove of silver fair, 
     of silver were her lanterns made, 
     her prow was fashioned like a swan, 
     and light upon her banners laid. 
 
     In panoply of ancient kings, 
     in chain‚d rings he armoured him; 
     his shining shield was scored with runes 
     to ward all wounds and harm from him; 
     his bow was made of dragon-horn, 
     his arrows shorn of ebony, 
     of silver was his habergeon, 
     his scabbard of chalcedony; 
     his sword of steel was valiant, 
     of adamant his helmet tall, 
     an eagle -plume upon his crest, 
     upon his breast an emerald. 
 
     Beneath the Moon and under star 
     he wandered far from northern strands, 
     bewildered on enchanted ways 
     beyond the days of mortal lands. 
     From gnashing of the Narrow Ice 

####-     where shadow lies on frozen hills, 
     from nether heats and burning waste  
     he turned in haste, and roving still 
     on starless waters far astray 
     at last he came to Night of Naught, 
     and passed, and never sight he saw 
     of shining shore nor light he sought. 
 
     The winds of wrath came driving him, 
     and blindly in the foam he fled 
     from west to east and errandless, 
     unheralded he homeward sped. 
 
     There flying Elwing came to him, 
     and flame was in the darkness lit; 
     more bright than light of diamond 
     the fire upon her carcanet. 
     The Silmaril she bound on him 
     and crowned him with the living light 
     and dauntless then with burning brow 
     he turned his prow; and in the night 
     from Otherworld beyond the Sea 
     there strong and free a storm arose, 
     a wind of power in Tarmenel; 
     by paths that seldom mortal goes 
     his boat it bore with biting breath  
     as might of death across the grey 
     and long-forsaken seas distressed: 
     from east to west he passed away. 
 
     Through Evernight he back was borne 
     on black and roaring wa ves that ran 
     o'er leagues unlit and foundered shores 
     that drowned before the Days began, 
     until he heard on strands of pearl 
     when ends the world the music long, 
     where ever foaming billows roll 

####-     the yellow gold and jewels wan. 
     He saw the Mountain silent rise 
     where twilight lies upon the knees 
     of Valinor, and Eldamar 
     beheld afar beyond the seas. 
     A wanderer escaped from night 
     to haven white he came at last, 
     to Elvenhome the green and fair 
     where keen the air, where pale as glass 
     beneath the Hill of Ilmarin  
     a-glimmer in a valley sheer 
     the lamplit towers of Tirion 
     are mirrored on the Shadowmere. 
 
     He tarried there from errantry, 
     and melodies they taught to him, 
     and sages old him marvels told, 
     and harps of gold they brought to him. 
     They clothed him then in elven-white, 
     and seven lights before him sent, 
     as through the Calacirian 
     to hidden land forlorn he went. 
     He came unto the timeless halls 
     where shining fall the countless years, 
     and endless reigns the Elder King 
     in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer; 
     and words unheard were spoken then 
     of folk of Men and Elven-kin, 
     beyond the world were visions showed 
     forbid to those that dwell therein. 
 
     A ship then new they built for him 
     of mithril and of elven-glass 
     with shining prow; no shaven oar 
     nor sail she bore on silver mast: 
     the Silmaril as lantern light 
     and banner bright with living flame 

####-     to gleam thereon by Elbereth  
     herself was set, who thither came 
     and wings immortal made for him, 
     and laid on him undying doom, 
     to sail the shoreless skies and come 
     behind the Sun and light of Moon. 
 
     From Evereven's lofty hills 
     where softly silver fountains fall 
     his wings him bore, a wandering light, 
     beyond the mighty Mountain Wall. 
     From World's End then he turned away 
     and yearned again to find afar 
     his home through shadows journeying, 
     and burning as an island star 
     on high above the mists he came, 
     a distant flame before the Sun, 
     a wonder ere the waking dawn  
     where grey the Norland waters run. 
 
     And over Middle -earth he passed 
     and heard at last the weeping sore 
     of women and of elven-maids 
     in Elder Days, in years of yore. 
     gut on him mighty doom was laid, 
     till Moon should fade, an orb‚d star 
     to pass, and tarry never more 
     on Hither Shores where mortals are; 
     for ever still a herald on 
     an errand that should never rest 
     to bear his shining lamp afar, 
     the Flammifer of Westernesse. 
     The  chanting  ceased. Frodo opened his eyes  and  saw  that Bilbo  was 
seated  on  his  stool  in  a  circle  of listeners,  who  were smiling   and 
applauding. 
     `Now we had better have it again,' said an Elf. 
     Bilbo got up  and bowed.  `I am  flattered, Lindir,'  he said. 'But  it 

####-would be too tiring to repeat it all.' 
     'Not too  tiring  for you,' the Elves answered laughing.  'You k now you  
are never tired  of reciting  your own verses.  But really  we cannot answer  
your question at one hearing!' 
     `What!' cried Bilbo. 'You can't tell which parts were  mine,  and which 
were the D®nadan's?' 
     'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals' said 
the Elf.  
     'Nonsense, Lindir,'  snorted Bilbo. 'If you can't distinguish between a  
Man  and a Hobbit,  your  judgement is  poorer than  I  imagined. They're as 
different as peas and apples.' 
     'Maybe.  To  sheep  other sheep no  doubt  appear  different,'  laughed 
Lindir. `Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have other  
business.' 
     'I won't  argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so much music 
and singing. I'll leave you to guess, if  you want to.' 
     He got up and came towards Frodo. 'Well, that's over,' he said in a low 
voice. `It went off  better than  I expected. I don't often get asked for  a  
second hearing. What did you think of it?' 
     `I am not going to try and guess,' said Frodo smiling. 
     `You needn't,' said Bilbo. `As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except 
that Aragorn insisted  on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think it 
important. I don't know  why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing 
rather above my head, and  he  said that if I had  the cheek to make  verses 
about  Edrendil in the house  of  Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was 
right.' 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo. `It seemed to  me  to fit somehow, though I 
can't explain. I was half asleep when you began,  and it seemed to follow on  
from  something that I  was dreaming about.  I didn't understand that it was 
really you speaking until near the end.' 
     `It  is  difficult to  keep awake here, until you get used to it;'  said 
Bilbo.  'Not that hobbits  would ever acquire quite  the elvish appetite for  
music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more. 
They will be going on  for a long time yet. What  do you say to slipping off 
for some more quiet talk?' 
     `Can we?' said Frodo. 
     `Of course. This is merrymaking not business.  Come and go as you like,  

####-as long as you don't make a noise.' 
     They  got  up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made  for  the 
doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a  smile on his face. In 
spite of his delight in  Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of  regret as they 
passed  out of the Hall of Fire.  Even as they  stepped over the threshold a  
single clear voice rose in song. 
     A Elbereth Gilthoniel, 
     silivren penna mnriel 
     o menel aglar elenath! 
     Na-chaered palan -dnriel 
     o galadhremmin ennorath, 
     Fanuilos, le linnathon 
     nef aear, sn nef aearon! 
     Frodo halted  for a moment,  looking back. Elrond was in his  chair and 
the  fire was on his face like summer -light upon the trees. Near him sat the 
Lady Arwen. To  his surprise  Frodo saw that Aragorn stood  beside  her; his 
dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed  to be  clad  in elven-mail, and a  
star shone  on his breast.  They spoke together, and then suddenly it seemed  
to Frodo that Arwen  turned towards him, and the light of  her eyes  fell on 
him from afar and pierced his heart. 
     He  stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the elvish song 
fell like  clear  jewels  of blended  word  and melody. `It  is  a  song  to 
Elbereth,' said Bilbo. `They will sing that, and other songs of the  Blessed 
Realm, many times tonight. Come on!' 
     He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the  gar dens 
and looked  south across the ravine  of the Bruinen. There they sat for some  
while,  looking  through  the   window   at  the  bright  stars  above   the 
steep-climbing  woods, and  talking softly. They  spoke no more of the small 
news of  the  Shire far  away, nor  of  the dark  shadows  and  perils  that 
encompassed  them,  but  of  the  fair  things  they  had seen in the  world 
together,  of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and the  gentle fall of the 
bright year in the woods.  
     At last there came  a knock  on the door. `Begging  your pardon,'  said 
Sam,  putting in his head, `but I was just wondering if you would be wanting  
anything.' 
     `And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,' replied  Bilbo. `I guess you mean that 
it is time your master went to bed.' 

####-     `Well, sir,  there is a  Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got 
up today for the first time.' 
     `Quite right, Sam,'  laughed Bilbo. `You can  trot off and tell Gandalf 
that he  has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it  has been good  
to see you again! There are no folk like  hobbits  after all for a real good 
talk. I am getting very  old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to 
see your chapters of  our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I  think, and 
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!' 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Council of Elrond 

 
 
     Next day Frodo woke  early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked along  
the terraces above  the  loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun 
rise  above the far  mountains, and shine  down. Slanting  through the  thin 
silver mist;  the dew upon the  yellow leaves was glimmering, and  the woven 
nets of  gossamer twinkled  on  every bush.  Sam  walked beside  him, saying 
nothing.  but  sniffing the air, and looking every now and again with wonder  
in his eyes at the great heights in the East. The snow was white upon  their 
peaks. 
     On a seat cut  in  the  stone beside  a turn in the path they came upon 
Gandalf and  Bilbo  deep in  talk. `Hullo!  Good morning!' said Bilbo. `Feel  
ready for the  great council?' 
     `I feel ready  for anything,' answered Frodo. `But most of all I should 
like to go walking  today and  explore the valley. I should like to get into 
those pine-woods up there.' He pointed away far up the side of  Rivendell to  
the north. 
     'You may  have  a chance later,' said Gandalf. `But we cannot  make any 
plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.' 
     Suddenly as they were talking a  single clear bell rang out.  `That  is 
the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,' cr ied Gandalf. `Come along now! 
Both you and Bilbo are wanted.' 
     Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back 
to the  house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten,  trotted 
Sam. 
     Gandalf  led them to the porch where  Frodo had found  his  friends the 
evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in the 
valley. The noise of bubbling  waters  came up  from the foaming  river -bed. 
Birds were singing,  and a  wholesome  peace lay on the  land. To  Frodo his 
dangerous flight, and  the rumours  of  the darkness growing  in  the  world 
outside, already seemed only the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces 
that were turned to meet them as they entered were grave. 
     Elrond was there, and  several others were seated in silence about him. 
Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gluin;  and  in a corner alone Strider was sitting, 
clad in  his old  travel -worn clothes again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat  by 

####-his side, and presented him to the company, saying: 
     'Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have ever come 
hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.' 
     He then  pointed  out  and named those whom Frodo  had  not met before. 
There was a younger dwarf at Gluin's side: his son Gimli. Beside  Glorfindel  
there were several other counsellors of Elrond's household, of  whom Erestor 
was the chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf  from the Grey Havens who had 
come on an errand from Cnrdan the Shipwright. There  was also a  strange Elf 
clad in green  and  brown,  Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil,  
the King of the  Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a  
tall man with a fair and  noble face,  dark-haired and  grey-eyed, proud and 
stern of glance. 
     He was cloaked and booted as if for a  journey on horseback; and indeed  
though his garments were rich,  and his cloak was lined with  fur, they were 
stained with long travel. He had a  collar of silver in which a single white 
stone was set; his locks  were shorn about his shoulders.  On a  baldric  he 
wore  a  great horn tipped with  silver that now was laid upon his knees. He 
gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder. 
     `Here,' said Elrond,  turning  to Gandalf, `is Boromir, a man  from the 
South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I  have bidden 
him to be present, for here his questions will be answered.' 
     Not all that was  spoken and debated in the  Council need now  be told. 
Much was said of events in  the  world outside, especially in the South, and 
in  the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things Frodo  had already  
heard many rumours; but the tale of Gluin was new to him, and when the dwarf 
spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the splendour  of their 
works  of  hand  the  hearts of  the  Dwarves of  the  Lonely Mountain  were 
troubled. 
     `It is now many years ago,' said Gluin, `that a shadow of disquiet fell 
upon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive. Words began to 
be whispered in secret-: it was said that we were hemmed in  a narrow place, 
and  that greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some 
spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers  that are called in  our own 
tongue Khazad-dym; and they  declared that now at last  we had the power and 
numbers to return.' 
     Gluin  sighed. `Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too deep we 
delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long  have  its vast mansions lain 

####-empty since the  children of Durin fled. But now we  spoke of  it again with  
longing, and yet with  dread;  for  no dwarf has dared to pass  the doors of 
Khazad-dym  for many  lives of kings, save Thrur only, and  he  perished. At 
last, however,  Balin  listened to  the whispers,  and resolved   to  go; and 
though Dbin did not  give leave willingly, he took with him  Ori and Uin and 
many of our folk, and they went away south. 
     "That  was  nigh  on thirty  years ago. For a while we had  news and it 
seemed good: messages reported that Moria ha d been entered and a great  work 
begun there.  Then there was silence,  and  no word has ever come from Moria  
since. 
     "Then  about  a  year  ago  a  messenger came  to Dbin,  but  not  from 
Moria -from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Dbin to his gate. The 
Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would 
give for  it, such  as he gave  of  old.  And he  asked urgently  concerning 
hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt.  "For Sauron  knows," 
said he, "that one of these was known to you on a time." 
     'At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And  then his 
fell  voice was lowered,  and he  would have sweetened it if he could. "As a  
small token only of your friendship  Sauron asks this,"  he  said: "that you  
should find this thief," such  was  his word, "and get from him, willing  or  
no, a  little  ring, the least of  rings,  that  once he stole. It  is but a  
trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good  will.  Find it, and 
three rings that the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall be  returned to you, 
and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief,  
whether  he  still lives  and where,  and you  shall  have great  reward and 
lasting friendship from the Lord. Refuse,  and things will not seem so well. 
Do you refuse?" 
     'At that his breath came like  the hiss of snakes, and all who stood by 
shuddered, but  Dbin said: "I say neither yea nor  nay. I must consider this 
message and what it means under its fair cloak." 
     ' "Consider well, but not too long," said he. 
     ` "The time of my thought is my own to spend," answered Dbin. 
     ' "For the present," said he, and rode into the darkness.  
     'Heavy have the  hearts  of our  chieftains  been since that  night. We 
needed not the fell voice of  the messenger to  warn us that his  words held 
both  menace  and  deceit; for  we knew  already that  the  power  that  has 
re-entered Mordor has not changed, and ever it betrayed us of old. Twice the 

####-messenger has returned, and has gone unanswered. The third and last time, so 
he says, is soon to come, before the ending of the year. 
     'And so I  have been  sent at last by Dbin  to warn  Bilbo  that  he is 
sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this 
least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and 
draws nearer.  We discover that messengers  have come also to King  Brand in 
Dale,  and  that he is  afraid. We  fear  that he may yield. Already war  is 
gathering on  his eastern borders.  If we make no answer, the Enemy may move 
Men of his rule to assail King Brand, and Dbin also.' 
     `You  have done well to come,' said Elrond.  `You will  hear today  all 
that you need in order to  understand  the purposes of the  Enemy. There  is 
naught that you can do, other than to resist, with hope or without  it.  But 
you do not stand alone. You will learn that your  trouble is but part of the 
trouble of all the western world. The Ring! What shall we do  with the Ring, 
the least of rings, the trifle that Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we 
must deem. 
     `That is the  purpose for which you are  called hither. Called, I  say. 
though  I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands. You  have 
come and are here met, in this very nick  of time, by chance as it may seem.  
Yet it  is not so. Believe rather that it is  so ordered  that  we, who  sit 
here, and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world. 
     `Now, therefore, things  shall be  openly spoken that  have been hidden 
from all  but a few  until this  day. And first, so that all  may understand 
what is the  peril, the  Tale  of the Ring shall be told  from the beginning 
even  to this present.  And I will begin that tale, though others  shall end 
it.' 
     Then all listened while  Elrond in his clear voice  spoke of Sauron and 
the Rings of Power,  and  their forging in the  Second Age of the world long 
ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the full  tale to none, 
and  many eyes were turned  t= Elrond in  fear and wonder as he  told of the 
Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Moria, and their eagerness 
for knowledge,  by which Sauron ensnared them. For  in that time he was  not 
yet evil to  behold, and they received his  aid  and  grew mighty in  craft, 
whereas he learned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly 
in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was 
aware of him, and  hid the  Three which  he had made; and there was war, and 
the land was laid waste, and the gate of Moria was shut. 

####-     Then through all the years that followed he  traced the Ring; but since 
that history is elsewhere recounted, even as Elrond  himself  set it down in 
his books of lore,  it is not   here recalled. For it is a long tale, full of 
deeds great and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke,  the sun rode  up 
the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased. 
     Of N®menor he spoke, its glory  and its fall,  and the  return  of  the 
Kings of Men to Middle-earth out  of the  deeps of  the Sea, borne  upon the 
wings  of storm.  Then Elendil the  Tall and  his  mighty sons,  Isildur and 
Anbrion, became great lords; and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the 
South-realm  in  Gondor above  the mouths  of  Anduin. But Sauron of  Mordor  
assailed them, and they made the Last Alliance of  Elves  and  Men,  and the 
hosts of Gil-galad and Elendil were mustered in Arnor. 
     Thereupon  Elrond paused a  while  and  sighed.  `I  remember  well the 
splendour  of  their banners,' he said.  `It recalled to me the glory of the 
Elder  Days  and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and  captains 
were  assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim  was 
broken, and the  Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever,  and it was  not 
so.' 
     `You  remember?'  said  Frodo,   speaking  his  thought  aloud  in  his 
astonishment. `But I thought,' he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, 'I 
thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.' 
     'So  it was  indeed,' answered  Elrond gravely.  `But my memory reaches 
back even  to the Elder Days. Edrendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin 
before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter  of Dior, son of L®thien 
of  Doriath .  I  have  seen  three ages in the West of the world,  and  many 
defeats, and many fruitless victories.  
     `I  was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host. I was at the 
Battle  of  Dagorlad before  the  Black Gate of  Mordor,  where  we had  the 
mastery: for the Spear  of  Gil-galad and the  Sword of Elendil, Aiglos  and 
Narsil, none could  withstand.  I beheld the  last  combat  on the slopes of 
Orodruin, where Gil-galad  died, and  Elendil fell, and Narsil broke beneath  
him; but Sauron himself  was overthrown, and Isildur  cut the Ring  from his 
hand with the hilt-shard of his father's sword, and took it for his own.' 
     At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. `So that is what became of the 
Ring!' he  cried. `If ever  such a  tale was told  in the South, it  has long 
been forgotten. I have  heard of  the Great Ring of him that we do not name;  
but we believed  that it  perished from the world in the  ruin of  his first  

####-realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.' 
     `Alas! yes,' said Elrond. `Isildur took it, as should not have been. It 
should have  been cast then into Orodruin's fire nigh  at hand  where it was 
made. But few marked what Isildur did.  He alone stood by his father in that 
last mortal  contest; and by Gil-galad only Cnrdan stood, and I. But Isildur 
would not listen to our counsel. 
     '  "This  I will have as weregild for  my father, and my  brother,"  he 
said; and  therefore whether we would or no, he took  it to treasure it. But 
soon he was betrayed by  it  to  his death; and so  it is named in the North 
Isildur's Bane. Yet death  maybe  was  better  than  what  else  might  have 
befallen him. 
     'Only to the North did  these tidings come, and  only  to a few.  Small 
wonder  it is that you have not heard them,  Boromir. From the  ruin  of the 
Gladden Fields,  where Isildur perished, three men only came ever back  over 
the mountains  after long wandering. One of these was  Ohtar, the esquire of 
Isildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and he brought them to 
Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who being  but a  child had remained  here in 
Rivendell.  But Narsil was broken and its light extinguished, and it has not 
yet been forged again. 
     `Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last  Alliance? Not wholly so, 
yet it  did not achieve  its  end. Sauron was diminished, but not destroyed. 
His  Ring was  lost  but  not  unmade. The Dark  Tower  was broken,  but its 
foundations were not removed; for they were made with the power of the Ring, 
and while it remains  they wi ll endure. Many Elves and many mighty Men,  
and 
many  of  their  friends. had perished  in  the war. Anbrion  was slain, and 
Isildur was slain; and Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall  
there  be  any  such  league  of  Elves  and  Men; for  Men  multiply and the 
Firstborn decrease, and the two  kindreds are estranged. And ever since that 
day  the race  of N®menor has decayed,  and  the  span of  their  years  has 
lessened. 
     'In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden Fields the 
Men  of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of Ann®minas beside 
Lake 
Evendim fell  into ruin; and  the heirs  of Valandil  removed and  dwelt  at 
Fornost on the high North Downs, and  that now too is desolate. Men call  it  
Deadmen's  Dike,  and  they  fear  to  tread there.  For the  folk of  Arnor  

####-dwindled, and their  foes devoured them, and their lordship passed,  leaving  
only green mounds in the grassy hills. 
     'In  the South  the  realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while  its 
splendour grew, recalling  somewhat of the might  of N®menor,  ere it  fell. 
High towers  that people built, and strong places. and havens of many ships;  
and the  winged crown of the Kings of  Men was  held in awe by folk of  many 
tongues. Their chief city wa s  Osgiliath, Citadel of the Stars. through  the 
midst of which  the River  flowed. And Minas Ithil they built, Tower  of the  
Rising  Moon,  eastward  upon  a shoulder of the  Mountains  of  Shadow; and 
westward at the feet of the White  Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower  of 
the Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew a white tree, from the 
seed of that tree which Isildur  brought over the  deep waters, and the seed 
of that tree before came from Eressla, and before that  out of the Uttermost  
West in the Day before days when the world was young. 
     `But  in the  wearing of the  swift years  of Middle-earth the line  of 
Meneldil son of Anbrion failed, and the  Tree withered, and the blood of the 
N®menoreans became  mingled with that of lesser men. Then the watch upon 
the 
walls of  Mordor slept, and  dark  things crept back to  Gorgoroth. And on a  
time evil things came  forth, and they took Minas Ithil and abode in it, and 
they made it into a place of dread; and it is called Minas Morgul, the Tower  
of Sorcery. Then Minas Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of 
Guard; 
and these two cities  were ever at war, but Osgiliath  which lay between was 
deserted and in its ruins shadows walked. 
     'So it has been  for many lives of men. But  the  Lords of Minas Tirith 
still  fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the passage  of the River from 
Argonath  to the  Sea.  And now that part of the tale that  I shall tell  is 
drawn to its close. For in the days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of 
all knowledge, and the  Three  were  released from  its dominion. But now in 
this latter day they  are  in peril once more, for to our sorrow the One has 
been  found. Others shall speak of its finding,  for  in that I played small 
part.' 
     He ceased, but  at once Boromir  stood up, tall and proud, before them. 
Give  me leave, Master  Elrond, said  he, first  to  say more of Gondor; for  
verily from the land of Gondor I  am come. And  it would  be well for all to 
know what passes there. For few,  I deem, know of  our deeds, and  therefore 

####-guess little of their peril, if we should fail at last. 
     `Believe  not that in the land of Gondor the blood of N®menor is spent, 
nor all its pride  and dignity forgotten. By our valour the wild folk of the 
East are still restrained,  and the terror of Morgul  kept at bay; and  thus 
alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind  us,  bulwark  of 
the West. But if the passages of the River should be won, what then?  
     `Yet  that hour, maybe, is not now far away.  The  Nameless  Enemy  has 
arisen again.  Smoke  rises once more from Orodruin that we call Mount 
Doom. 
The power  of the Black  Land  grows and we are  hard beset. When the  
Enemy 
returned  our folk were driven from  Ithilien, our fair  domain east of  the 
River, though we kept a  foothold there and  strength of arms. But this very 
year,  in  the days of  June, sudden war came  upon us out of Mordor, and we 
were swept away. We were  outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the 
Easterlings  and the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by numbers that we  were 
defeated. A power was there that we have not felt before. 
     `Some said  that it could be seen, like a great  black horseman, a dark 
shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a  madness filled our foes,  but fear 
fell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave way and fled. Only a remnant 
of our eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still  stood 
amid the ruins of Osgiliath. 
     'I was in  the company  that  held the  bridge, until it was cast  down 
behind us. Four  only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself and  
two 
others. But still we  fight on, holding all  the  west shores of Anduin; and  
those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: much  
praise but little help. Only from Rohan  now will any men ride to us when we 
call. 
     `In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous leagues 
to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone. But  I  do not 
seek allies in war. The  might of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons,  it is 
said. I come  to ask for counsel and  the  unravelling of hard words. For on 
the  eve  of  the  sudden assault a dream came to  my brother in a  troubled 
sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to him again, and once to me. 
     'In that  dream I  thought the  eastern sky grew dark  and there  was a  
growing thunder, but  in  the  West a pale light lingered, and out of  it  I 

####-heard a voice, remote but clear, crying: 
     Seek for the Sword that was broken: 
     In Imladris it dwells; 
     There shall be counsels taken 
     Stronger than Morgul-spells. 
     There shall be shown a token 
     That Doom is near at hand, 
     For Isildur's Bane shall waken, 
     And the Halfling forth shall stand. 
     Of these words we could understand little, and we  spoke to our father, 
Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore of  Gondor. This only would 
he say, that Imladris was  of old the name among the Elves of a far northern 
dale, where Elrond the Halfelven dwelt, g reatest  of lore-masters. Therefore 
my  brother, seeing how desperate  was our need, was eager to heed the dream 
and seek for  Imladris; but since the  way was full  of doubt and  danger, I 
took the journey upon  myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long 
have I  wandered  by roads forgotten, seeking the house of Elrond, of  which  
many had heard, but few knew where it lay.' 
     'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you'  said 
Aragorn,  standing up. He cast  his sword upon  the  table  that stood before 
Elrond,  and  the blade  was in  two  pieces.  `Here  is  the Sword that was 
Broken!' he said. 
     `And  who  are you, and what have  you to do with  Minas Tirith?' asked 
Boromir,  looking  in  wonder  at  the  lean face  of   the  Ranger  and  his 
weather-stained cloak. 
     `He is Aragorn  son of Arathorn,'  said Elrond;  `and  he is  descended 
through many fathers from Isildur Elendil's son of  Minas  Ithil. He  is the 
Chief of the D®nedain in the North, and few are now left  of that folk.' 
     `Then  it  belongs to  you,  and not to  me  at all!'  cried  Frodo  in 
amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected  the Ring to be demanded 
at once. 
     'It does not belong  to either of us,'  said Aragorn; `but it has  been 
ordained that you should hold it for a while.' 
     'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!' said Gandalf solemnly. `The time has come. 
Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle.' 
     There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was shaken  by 
a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance to  reveal the Ring, 

####-and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and 
flickered as he held it up before them in his trembling hand. 
     'Behold Isildur's Bane!' said Elrond. 
     Boromir's eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. `The Halfling!' 
he  muttered.  `Is then the  doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why then 
should we seek a broken sword?' 
     'The words were not the  doom of Minas Tir ith,' said Aragorn. `But doom 
and great  deeds are indeed at hand.  For the  Sword that  was Broken is the 
Sword of Elendil that broke beneath him when  he fell. It has been treasured 
by  his  heirs when all other heirlooms  were lost; for it was spoken of old 
among  us that it should be made  again when the  Ring, Isildur's  Bane, was 
found. Now you have seen the sword that you have sought, what would you 
ask? 
Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?' 
     `I was  not  sent to beg  any boon, but to  seek only the meaning  of a  
riddle,' answered Boromir proudly. `Yet we are hard  pressed, and  the Sword 
of  Elendil would be a help beyond  our hope-if  such a  thing could  indeed 
return out of  the  shadows  of  the past.' He look ed again  at Aragorn, and 
doubt was in his eyes. 
     Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyed 
on his friend's behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst out: 
     All that is gold does not glitter, 
     Not all those who wander are lost; 
     The old that is strong does not wither, 
     Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 
 
     From the ashes a fire shall be woken, 
     A light from the shadows shall spring; 
     Renewed shall be blade that was broken: 
     The crownless again shall be king. 
     `Not very good perhaps, but to the point  -- if you need more beyond the 
word  of Elrond. If that  was worth a journey of a hundred  and ten days  to 
hear, you had best listen to it.' He sat down with a snort. 
     `I  made  that  up myself,' he whispered to Frodo, `for the  D®nadan, a  
long  time  ago when  he first told me about  himself. I almost wish that my 
adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.' 
     Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. `For my part  I 

####-forgive your doubt,'  he said. 'Little do I resemble the figures  of Elendil 
and Isildur as they stand carven in their majesty in  the halls of Denethor. 
I  am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I  have had  a hard life 
and a long; and  the  leagues that lie between here and  Gondor are a  small 
part  in the count of my journeys.  I have crossed many mountains  and  many 
rivers, and trodden  many  plains, even  into the far  countries of Rhyn and 
Harad where the stars are strange. 
     'But my home, such  as I have, is in the  North. For  here the heirs of 
Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto son for many 
generations.  Our days have darkened,  and  we  have dwindled; but ever  the 
Sword has passed to a new keeper. And this I will say to you, Boromir, ere I  
end.  Lonely  men are we, Rangers of  the wild, hunters--but hunters ever of 
the servants  of the Enemy; for they are found in many places, not in Mordor 
only. 
     `If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we  have played another  
part. Many evil things there are that your strong walls and bright swords do 
not  stay. You  know  little  of the  lands beyond  your  bounds.  Peace and 
freedom, do you say? The North would have known them little but for us. Fear 
would  have destroyed them.  But when dark  things come  from the  houseless 
hills, or creep from sunless  woods,  they fly from us. What roads would any 
dare to tread, what safety would there be in quiet lands, or in the homes of 
simple men at night, if the D®nedain were asleep, or were all gone into  the 
grave?  
     `And yet less  thanks  have  we than you. Travellers  scowl at  us, and 
countrymen give us  scornful names. "Strider"  I am to one fat man who lives 
within a day's march  of foes that would  freeze his heart or lay his little 
town in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would  not have  it 
otherwise. If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple  they will be, 
and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the task of my kindred, 
while the years have lengthened and the grass has grown. 
     `But now  the world is changing once again. A new hour comes. Isildur's 
Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword  shall be reforged. I  will come 
to Minas Tirith.' 
     `Isildur's Bane is found, you say,' said Boromir. `I have seen a bright 
ring in the Halfling's hand; but Isildur perished ere this  age of the world 
began, they say. How do  the Wise know that this ring is his? And how has it 
passed  down  the  years,  until  it  is  brought  hither  by so  strange  a  

####-messenger?' 
     `That shall be told,' said Elrond. 
     `But not  yet, I beg, Master!' said Bilbo. `Already the Sun is climbing 
to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.' 
     `I  had  not named you,' said Elrond  smiling. `But I do so now.  Come!  
Tell us your tale. And if you have  not yet cast your story  into verse, you  
may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.' 
     `Very well,' said Bilbo. `I will do as you bid. But I will now tell the 
true story, and  if some here have heard  me tell it otherwise'  -- he looked 
sidelong at Gluin -- `I ask them to forget it  and forgive me. I only wished 
to claim the treasure  as my very own  in those days, and to be rid  of  the 
name of thief that was put on me. But  perhaps I understand things a  little 
better now. Anyway, this is what happened.' 
     To  some there  Bilbo's tale was  wholly  new, and they  listened  with 
amazement while  the old  hobbit, actually not  at all displeased, recounted 
his  adventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit a single riddle. 
He would have given also  an account of his party and disappearance from the 
Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand. 
     'Well told, my friend,' he said, `but that  is enough at this time. For  
the moment it suffices to know that the Ring passed to Frodo, your heir. Let  
him now speak!' 
     Then, less willingly  than Bilbo, Frodo  told of all his  dealings with 
the  Ring from the day that  it passed  into his keeping. Every step  of his 
journey from Hobbiton to the Ford  of Bruinen was questioned and considered, 
and  everything  that  he  could  recall  concerning  the  Black Riders  was 
examined. At last he sat down again. 
     `Not bad,' Bilbo said to him. `You  would have made a good story of it, 
if they hadn't kept  on interrupting. I tried to  make  a few notes,  but we 
shall have to  go  over it all again together some time, if I am to write it 
up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!' 
     `Yes, it made quite a long tale,' answered Frodo. 'But  the story still 
does not seem complete to  me.  I still want to know a good deal, especially 
about Gandalf.' 
     Galdor of the Havens, who sat near by, overheard him. `You speak for me 
also,'  he cried, and  turning  to  Elrond he  said: `The Wise may have good 
reason to believe that the halfling's trove is indeed the Great Ring of long 
debate, unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But may we not 

####-hear  the proofs? And I would ask this  also. What of Saruman? He is learned 
in  the lore of the Rings, yet he is not among us. What is his counsel-if he 
knows the things that we have heard?' 
     `The  questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,' said Elrond. 
`I had not  overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it 
is the part of Gandalf to make clear;  and I call upon  him last, for it  is 
the place of honour, and in all this matter he has been the chief.' 
     `Some,  Galdor,'   said Gandalf, `would think the tidings of Gluin,  and 
the pursuit of  Frodo,  proof enough that the halfling's trove is a thing of 
great worth to  the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The Nine the  Nazgyl 
keep. The Seven are taken or destroyed.' At this Gluin stirred, but  did not 
speak. `The Three we know of. What then is this one that he desires so much?  
     'There  is indeed  a  wide  waste of time  between  the River  and  the 
Mountain, between the loss and the finding. But  the gap in the knowledge of 
the Wise  has been  filled at  last. Yet too slowly. For  the Enemy has been 
close  behind, closer even than I feared. And well is it that not until this 
year, this very summer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth. 
     'Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to pass the 
doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur,  and secretly explored his ways, and 
found thus that our fears  were  true:  he was none other than  Sauron,  our 
Enemy of  old, at  length  taking shape  and power  again.  Some,  too, will 
remember also that Saruman dissuaded us from open deeds against him, and 
for 
long we watched him only.  Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, 
and the Council put forth its strength  and  drove  the evil out of Mirkwood 
and that was in the very year of the finding of this Ring: a strange chance, 
if chance it was. 
     `But we were  too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron  also had watched us,  
and had long prepared against our stroke, governing Mordor from afar through 
Minas Morgu l, where his Nine servants dwelt, until  all  was  ready. Then he  
gave way before us,  but  only feigned to flee,  and soon  after came to the 
Dark Tower and openly declared  himself. Then for the  last time the Council 
met; for now we learned that  he was seeking ever more eagerly for the  One. 
We feared then that  he had some news  of it  that we knew  nothing  of. But 
Saruman said nay, and repeated what  he had  said to us before: that the One 
would never again be found in Middle-earth. 
     `  "At  the worst,"  said he, "our Enemy knows that we have  it not and 

####-that it still is  lost. But what was lost may yet be  found, he thinks. Fear 
not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this matter? Into 
Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago,  while  Sauron slept, it  was rolled 
down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until the End."' 
     Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of 
the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world had so long 
lain hidden. He sighed. 
     `There  I was at fault,' he said. `I was lulled by the words of Saruman 
the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner, and our peril would 
now be less.' 
     `We were all at  fault,' said Elrond, `and but  for your vigilance  the 
Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!' 
     `From the first my heart misgave  me,  against all reason that I knew,' 
said Gandalf, `and I desired  to know how this thing came to Gollum, and how 
long he had possessed it. So I set a wa tch for  him, guessing that he  would 
ere long come forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but 
he escaped and was not found. And then alas! I let the matter rest, watching  
and waiting only, as we have too often done. 
     `Time passed  with many cares, until my  doubts were awakened again  to 
sudden  fear. Whence  came the hobbit's  ring?  What,  if my  fear was true, 
should be  done with it? Those  things I must decide. But I spoke yet of  my  
dread to none, knowing the peril of an  untimely whisper, if it went astray. 
In all the long wars with  the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest  
foe. 
     'That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware  that  spies of many  
sorts, even  beasts and birds,  were gathered round the Shire, and  my  fear 
grew.  I called  for the help of the D®nedain, and their watch  was doubled; 
and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.' 
     `And I,' said Aragorn, `counselled that we should hunt  for Gollum. too 
late though it may seem. And since it seemed fit that Isildur's  heir should 
labour to  repair  Isildur's fault, I went  with  Gandalf  on  the  long and 
hopeless search.' 
     Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland, 
down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor. `There we 
had 
rumour of him, and we guess  that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but 
we never found him,  and  at last  I  despaired. And  then  in my despair  I 

####-thought again of a test that might make the finding of  Gollum unneeded. The 
ring  itself  might  tell if it were the One.  The memory  of  words  at the 
Council came back to me: words of Saruman, half-heeded at the time.  I heard 
them now clearly in my heart. 
     ` "The Nine, the Seven, and the Three," he said, "had each their proper  
gem. Not so the  One.  It  was round  and  unadorned,  as it were one of the 
lesser rings; but its maker set marks upon it that the skilled, maybe, could 
still see and read." 
     `What those  marks were he had not said. Who now would know? The 
maker. 
And Saruman? But great though his lore may be,  it  must have a source. What 
hand  save Sauron's ever  held this  thing, ere  it was  lost?  The hand  of 
Isildur alone. 
     `With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly  to Gondor . 
In former days the members  of my order  had been  well received  there, but 
Saruman most of all. Often he had  been for long  the  guest of the Lords of 
the  City. Less welcome  did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old, and 
grudgingly he permitted me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books.  
     ' "If indeed you look only, as  you  say, for records of  ancient days, 
and the beginnings of the City,  read on! " he said.  "For to me what was is 
less dark than what is to come, and that  is  my care.  But unless you  have 
more  skill even  than Saruman,  who has  studied here  long, you  will find 
naught that  is not  well known to  me, who am  master of  the lore of  this 
City." 
     `So said Denethor.  And yet  there lie in his  hoards many records that 
few  now can read,  even of  the lore-masters, for their scripts and tongues 
have become dark  to later  men.  And  Boromir, there lies in  Minas  Tirith 
still, unread, I  guess,  by  any save Saruman  and  myself since the  kings 
failed, a scroll  that Isildur made himself. For Isildur did not  march away 
straight from the war in Mordor, as some have told the tale.' 
     'Some in the North, maybe,' Boromir broke in.  'All know in Gondor that 
he went  first  to Minas Anor and  dwelt a while  with his nephew  Meneldil, 
instructing him,  before he committed to him the  rule of the South Kingdom. 
In  that time he planted there the last sapling of  the White Tree in memory 
of his brother.' 
     `But in that time also he made this scroll,' said Gandalf;  `and that is 
not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns  the Ring, 

####-and thus wrote Isildur therein: 
     The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; but 
records  of  it  shall  be left  in  Gondor,  where also dwell the  heirs of 
Elendil, lest a time come when the memory of these great  matters shall grow 
dim. 
     `And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as he found it. 
     It  was  hot  when  I first took it, hot as  a glede,  and my  hand was 
scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain  of  it. 
Yet even as I write it is cooled, and it seemeth to shrink, though it loseth  
neither  its  beauty nor its  shape. Already the  writing  upon it, which at 
first was as clear as red flame, fadeth and is now  only barely to be  read. 
It is fashioned in  an elven-script of  Eregion, for they have no letters in  
Mordor for such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to 
be  a tongue of the Black Land, since  it  is foul and uncouth. What evil it  
saith I do  not  know; but I trace here a copy  of it,  lest it fade  beyond 
recall. The Ring misseth,  maybe, the heat of Sauron's hand, which was black 
and yet burned like fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the 
gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed. gut  for my part I will 
risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works of Sauron the only fair. It  is 
precious to me, though I buy it with great pain. 
     'When  I read these words, my quest was  ended. For  the traced writing 
was indeed as Isildur  guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and  the servants of 
the Tower. And what was said therein was already  known. For in the day that 
Sauron first put on  the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the  Three, was aware of 
him, and from afar he  heard him speak these words, and so his evil purposes 
were revealed. 
     `At once  I took my leave of  Denethor, but even as  I went northwards, 
messages came to me out of Lurien that Aragorn had passed that way, and that 
he had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went  first to meet him 
and hear his tale.  Into what deadly  perils  he had  gone alone I dared not 
guess.' 
     `There is little need  to tell  of them,' said Aragorn. `If a  man must  
needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly flowers of Morgul 
Vale, then  perils he will have. I, too, despaired at  last,  and I began my 
homeward  journey.  And then, by fortune, I  came suddenly on what I sought: 
the marks of soft feet beside  a muddy pool. But now the trail was fresh and  
swift, and it  led  not to Mordor but  away. Along  the  skirts  of the Dead 

####-Marshes  I followed  it,  and  then I had him.  Lurking by a  stagnant mere, 
peering in  the water as the dark  eve  fell, I  caught  him, Gollum. He was 
covered  with green slime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and 
I  was not gentle. Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than the marks 
of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of  all  my journey, the road back, 
watching him day and night, making him walk before  me with a halter  on his 
neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever 
towards Mirkwood. I brought him there at last and gave him to the Elves, for 
we had agreed that this should  be  done; and I was  glad to  be  rid of his 
company, for he  stank. For my part I hope never to look upon him again; but 
Gandalf came and endured long speech with him.' 
     `Yes,  long  and weary,' said Gandalf, `but not without profit. For one 
thing, the  tale  he told of his loss agreed  with  that which Bilbo has now 
told openly  for  the  first time; but  that mattered little,  since  I  had 
already guessed it. But I  learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of 
the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also  that he  had 
possessed  it long. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring  had 
lengthened his  years far beyond their span;  but that power only  the Great 
Rings wield. 
     `And if that is  not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other test that 
I spoke of. Upon this very ring  which you have here seen  held aloft, round  
and unadorned, the  letters that Isildur reported may  still be read, if one 
has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the fire a while. That I 
have done, and this I have read: 
     Ash  nazg durbatulyk, ush  nazg  gimbatul,  ash  nazg  thrakatulyk  agh  
burzum-ishi krimpatul.' 
     The change in  the wizard's voice  was  astounding. Suddenly it  became 
menacing,  powerful, harsh as stone.  A  shadow seemed to pass over the high 
sun,  and  the porch for  a moment grew  dark. All trembled,  and the  Elves 
stopped their ears. 
     `Never before has any voice dared to utter the  words of that tongue in 
Imladris,  Gandalf  the Grey,'  said  Elrond, as  the shadow passed  and the 
company breathed once more. 
     `And let us  hope that none  will  ever speak it  here again,' answered 
Gandalf. `Nonetheless I do not ask  your  pardon, Master Elrond. For if that 
tongue is not soon to be heard in every corner of the West , then let all put 
doubt aside  that  this thing is  indeed what the Wise  have  declared:  the 

####-treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice;  and  in it lies a great 
part of his strength  of old. Out of the Black Years come the words that the 
Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they had been betrayed: 
     One Ring to  rule them all,  One  Ring to find  them, One Ring to bring 
them all and in the Darkness bind them. 
     `Know  also, my  friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum.  He  was 
loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but it  is beyond all doubt  that he 
went to Mordor, and  there all  that  he knew was forced from him. Thus  the  
Enemy knows now that the  One is found,  that it was  long in the Shire; and 
since his servants have pursued it  almost to our  door, he  soon will know, 
already he may know, even as I speak, that we have it here.' 
     All sat silent for a  while,  until  at length Boromir  spoke. `He is a  
small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What became 
of him? To what doom did you put him?' 
     'He is in prison, but no worse,' said  Aragorn.  `He had suffered much. 
There is no doubt that he  was tormented, and the fear of Sauron  lies black  
on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely kept by the watchful 
Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardly to be 
believed in one so lean and withered.  He could work much mischief still, if 
he were free. And I do not doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some 
evil errand.' 
     `Alas!  alas!' cried Legolas,  and in  his  fair  elvish face there was 
great distress. `The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told. They 
are not  good, but only  here have I learned  how evil they may seem to this 
company. Smjagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.' 
     'Escaped?' cried Aragorn. 'That is ill news indeed. We shall all rue it 
bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their trust?' 
     `Not through lack of  watchfulness,' said Legolas; `but perhaps through 
over -kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from others, and that 
more is known of our doings than we could wish. We guarded this creature day 
and  night, at Gandalf's  bidding,  much  though we wearied of the task. But 
Gandalf  bade us  hope still for his cure, and we had not the  heart to keep  
him ever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall  back into his old 
black thoughts.' 
     'You were less tender  to me,'  said Gluin with  a flash of his eyes as 
old memories were stirred  of  his imprisonment in  the  deep places of  the 
Elven-king's halls. 

####-     'Now  come!' said Gandalf. `Pray do not interrupt, my good Gluin.  That 
was  a regrettable misunderstanding,  long set right. If  all the grievances 
that stand between Elves and  Dwarves are to  be brought up  here, we may as 
well abandon this Council.' 
     Gluin  rose and bowed, and Legolas  continued.  'In  the days  of  fair 
weather we led Gollum through the  woods; and there was a high tree standing 
alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we let him mount up 
to the highest branches, until he felt the free  wind; but we set a guard at 
the tree's foot. One day he refused to come down, and the guards had no mind 
to climb  after him: he had learned the trick of clinging to boughs with his 
feet as well as with his hands; so they sat by the tree far into the night. 
     'It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that Orcs 
came  on us at unawares. We drove them off after  some time;  they were many 
and  fierce, but they came from over  the mountains, and were unused  to the  
woods. When the battle was  over, we  found  that Gollum was  gone, and  his 
guards were slain  or taken. It then seemed plain to  us that the attack had 
been made for his rescue, and that he knew  of  it beforehand. How that  was 
contrived we cannot guess; but Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy 
are many. The dark things that were driven  out in  the year of the Dragon's 
fall have returned in greater  numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil place,  
save where our realm is maintained. 
     `We have failed to  recapture Gollum.  We came on his trail among those 
of many Orcs, and it plunged deep into the Forest, going south. But ere long 
it escaped our  skill,  and  we  dared not  continue the hunt;  for we  were 
drawing nigh to Dol Guldur,  and that  is still a very evil place; we do not 
go that way.' 
     `Well,  well, he  is gone,' said Gandalf. 'We have no time  to seek for  
him again.  He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet that neither  
he nor Sauron have foreseen. 
     'And now  I will answer Galdor's other questions. What of Saruman? What 
are his counsels to us in this need? This tale I must tell in full, for only 
Elrond  has heard it yet, and that in brief, but it will bear on all that we 
must  resolve. It is the last  chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it 
has yet gone. 
     'At the  end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety was  on 
my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the little land; for I  had a  
foreboding  of some danger, still hidden  from  me but  drawing  near. There 

####-messages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heard 
of the Black Shadow  a chill smote my heart. But I found nothing  save a few 
fugitives  from  the South;  yet  it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of 
which they would not speak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along 
the Greenway; and  not  far from Bree  I came upon  a traveller sitting on a  
bank beside the road with his grazing  horse beside him. It was Radagast the 
Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel,  near the borders of Mirkwood. 
He 
is one of my order, but I had not seen him for many a year. 
     ` "Gandalf! " he cried.  "I was seeking you. But I  am  a  stranger  in 
these parts. All I knew was that  you might  be found  in a wild region with 
the uncouth name of Shire." 
     ' "Your information was  correct," I said. "But do not put it that way, 
if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the  borders of  the  Shire 
now.  And what do you want with me?  It must  be pressing.  You were never a  
traveller, unless driven by great need." 
     ' "I have an urgent errand," he said. "My news is evil." Then he looked 
about him, as if  the hedges  might have ears. "Nazgyl,"  he whispered. "The 
Nine are abroad again. They  have  crossed the River secretly and are moving 
westward. They have taken the guise of riders in black." 
     'I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it. 
     ` "The enemy must have some great need or purpose," said Radagast; "but 
what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate parts, I cannot 
guess." 
     ` "What do you mean? " said I. 
     ` "I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news  of a  
land called Shire." 
     ' "The Shire," I said; but my heart sank. For even the  Wise might fear 
to  withstand the  Nine,  when they  are gathered together under  their fell 
chieftain. A great  king and sorcerer he was  of  old,  and now  he wields a  
deadly fear. "Who told  you, and who sent you? " I asked. 
     ' "Saruman the White,"  answered Radagast. "And  he told me to say that 
if you feel the need, he will help; but you must seek his aid at once, or it 
will be too late." 
     'And  that  message  brought  me  hope.  For Saruman the  White is  the 
greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a  worthy  Wizard, a master of 
shapes and changes  of hue;  and he has much  lore of herbs  and beasts, and 

####-birds are especially  his friends. But Saruman  has long studied the arts of 
the Enemy himself, and thus we have often been able to forestall him. It was 
by the devices of Saruman  that we drove him  from Dol  Guldur. It might  be 
that he had found some weapons that would drive back the Nine. 
     ' "I will go to Saruman," I sa id. 
     ' "Then  you must go  now," said  Radagast; "for I have  wasted time in 
looking  for you,  and  the  days  are running short. I was told to find you  
before Midsummer, and that is now  here. Even if you set out from this spot, 
you will hardly  reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek. 
I myself  shall turn back at  once." And with that he mounted and would have 
ridden straight off.  
     ` "Stay a  moment! " I said. "We shall  need your help, and the help of 
all things that will give it. Send out messages  to all the beasts and birds 
that are  your friends.  Tell them to bring news  of anything that bears  on 
this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc." 
     `  "I will do  that,"  he said, and rode off  as if  the Nine were after  
him. 
     `I could not follow him then and  there. I had ridden  very far already 
that day, and I was as weary as my horse;  and I needed to consider matters.  
I stayed the  night in Bree, and decided that I had no time to return to the 
Shire. Never did I make a greater mistake!  
     `However,  I wrote a message  to Frodo,  and trusted  to  my friend the 
innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at long last to 
the dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard,  in  the  end  of the 
Misty  Mountains,  not far  from the Gap of Rohan. And Boromir will tell you  
that that is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and the 
northmost  foothills  of Ered  Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. But 
Isengard is a  circle of  sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with  a wall, 
and in the midst of that valley is a tower of  stone called Orthanc.  It was 
not made by Saruman, but by the Men of N®menor long ago; and it is very tall 
and has many secrets; yet  it looks not to be  a work of craft. It cannot be 
reached save  by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle there is 
only one gate. 
     'Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch  in the wall of 
rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the  keepers of the  gate  were on the 
watch for me and told me that Saruman awaited me. I rode under the arch, and 
the gate closed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, though I knew 

####-no reason for it. 
     'But  I rode to the foot of Orthanc,  and came to the stair  of Saruman 
and there he met me and led me up to his high chamber. He wore a ring on his 
finger. 
     `  "So you have come, Gandalf," he said to me gravely; but in  his eyes 
there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his heart. 
     ` "Yes, I have come," I said. "I have  come  for your  aid, Saruman the 
White." And that title seemed to anger him. 
     '  "Have  you indeed, Gandalf the Grey! " he scoffed.  "For aid? It has 
seldom been  heard of that  Gandalf the Grey sought for  aid, one so cunning  
and  so wise, wandering about  the lands,  and concerning  himself in  every 
business, whether it belongs to him or not." 
     'I looked  at him and wondered.  "But if I am  not deceived,"  said  I, 
"things are now moving which will require the union of all our strength." 
     ' "That may be so," he said, "but the thought is late in coming to you. 
How long. I wonder, have  you concealed  from me, the head of the Council, a  
matter  of greatest  import? What brings you now from your lurking-place  in 
the Shire? " 
     ' "The Nine have come forth again," I answered. "They have crossed  the 
River. So Radagast said to me." 
     ` "Radagast  the Brown! " laughed  Saruman, and  he no longer concealed 
his scorn. "Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Fool! 
Yet he had just the wit to play the part  that I set him. For you have come, 
and that was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay,  Gandalf 
the Grey,  and rest  from  journeys.  For  I  am  Saruman the Wise,  Saruman 
Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours! " 
     'I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white, were not 
so, but  were woven of  all  colours.  and  if  he moved they shimmered  and 
changed hue so that the eye was bewildered. 
     ' "I liked white better," I said. 
     ' "White! "  he sneered. "It serves as a beginning. White  cloth may be 
dyed. The white page can be overwritten; and the white light can be broken." 
     ' "In which case it is  no longer white," said I. "And he that breaks a  
thing to find out what it is has left the path of wisdom." 
     '  "You need  not  speak to me as to one of the fools that you take for  
friends," said he. "I have not brought  you hither  to be instructed by you, 
but to give you a choice." 

####-     'He  drew  himself up then and began to declaim, as if he were making a  
speech  long  rehearsed.  "The Elder Days  are gone.  The  Middle  Days  are 
passing. The Younger Days are  beginning. The time of the Elves is over, but 
our time is at hand: the world of Men, which  we must rule. But we must have 
power, power to order all things as  we  will, for that good  which only the 
Wise can see. 
     '  "And listen, Gandalf,  my old friend and  helper! "  he said, coming 
near and speaking now in a softer voice.  "I said we,  for we it may be,  if 
you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old  allies and 
policies will not avail us  at all. There is no hope left in Elves  or dying 
N®menor. This then  is  one  choice before you. before us. We may jo in  with 
that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf.  There is hope that way.  Its victory 
is at hand; and  there will be rich reward for those that  aided it.  As the 
Power grows, its proved friends will also  grow; and  the Wise, such  as you  
and I, may with patience come at last to direct its courses,  to control it. 
We  can bide  our time, we can keep our  thoughts in our  hearts,  deploring 
maybe  evils done by the way,  but  approving the high and ultimate purpose: 
Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the  things that  we have so far striven in vain 
to accomplish,  hindered rather than helped by  our weak  or  idle  friends.  
There need not be, there would not be, any  real change in our designs, only  
in our means." 
     ' "Saruman," I said, "I  have  heard  speeches  of this kind before, but 
only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I  
cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary my ears." 
     'He looked at me sidelong, and paused a while considering. "Well, I see 
that this wi se course  does  not commend itself to you,"  he said. "Not yet?  
Not if some better way can be contrived? " 
     `He came and laid his long hand on my arm.  "And why not, Gandalf? " he 
whispered. "Why not? The Ruling Ring? If  we could  command that,  then  the 
Power would pass to us. That is in truth why I brought  you here. For I have 
many eyes  in my service, and  I  believe that  you know where this precious 
thing now lies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what 
is your  business there? " As he said this a lust which he could not conceal 
shone suddenly in his eyes.  
     ' "Saruman," I  said, standing away from him, "only one hand at  a time 
can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble to say we!  But 
I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news of it to you, now  that 

####-I  learn  your  mind. You  were head of  the Council, but you have  unmasked 
yourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to  submit to  Sauron, or 
to yourself. I will take neither. Have you others to offer? " 
     'He was cold now and perilous. "Yes," he said. "I did not expect you to 
show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but I gave you the chance of aiding me 
willingly. and so saving yourself much trouble and pain. The third choice is 
to stay here, until the end." 
     ' "Until what end? " 
     ' "Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may find  means 
to  persuade you. Or until  it is found in your despite, and  the Ruler  has 
time to turn to lighter matters:  to devise, say,  a  fitting reward for the 
hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey." 
     ' "That  may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,"  said  I.  He 
laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it. 
     `They took me and they set me alone  on the p innacle of Orthanc, in the 
place  where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars.  There is no descent 
save  by a narrow stair of many  thousand steps, and  the valley below seems 
far away. I looked  on it and saw that, whereas it  had once been  green and 
fair, it was now filled with pits and forges. Wolves and orcs were housed in 
Isengard,  for Saruman was mustering a  great force  on his  own account, in 
rivalry of Sauron  and  not  in his service yet. Over  all his works  a dark 
smoke hung  and wrapped itself about the sides  of Orthanc. I stood alone on  
an island  in the clouds; and I had  no  chance  of escape, and my days were 
bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I  had but little room in which to pace 
to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North. 
     `That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt  assured, apart from  the words 
of Saruman which might  be  lies.  Long ere I came to  Isengard I had  heard 
tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for  
my friends in the Shire; but still I had some  hope.  I hoped that Frodo had 
set forth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reached Rivendell 
before  the deadly pursuit  began. And  both  my  fear and  my  hope  proved  
ill-founded. For my  hope  was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was 
founded on the cunning of Sauron. But  fat men  who sell ale have many calls 
to answer; and the power of  Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in 
the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to think that the 
hunters before whom all have fled or fallen would falter  in  the  Shire far 
away.' 

####-     `I saw you!' cried Frodo. `You were walking backwards and forwards. The 
moon shone in your hair.' 
     Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. 'I t was only a dream' said 
Frodo, `but it suddenly came back to me. I had  quite  forgotten it. It came 
some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.' 
     `Then it was  late in coming,' said Gandalf, 'as you will see. I was in 
an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom  been in 
such need, and  do not bear such  misfortune  well. Gandalf the  Grey caught  
like a fly in a spider's treacherous web! Yet  even  the most subtle spiders 
may leave a weak thread. 
     `At first I  feared,  as Saruman  no doubt intended,  that Radagast had 
also fallen. Yet I  had caught no  hint of anything wrong in his voice or in 
his eye at our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone to Isengard, or I 
should  have gone more warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealed  his 
mind and deceived his messenger. It would have been  useless in  any case to 
try and  win over  the honest Radagast  to  treachery. He sought me  in good 
faith, and so persuaded me. 
     `That  was the  undoing of Saruman's plot.  For Radagast knew no reason 
why  he should not do as I asked; and he rode away towards Mirkwood where 
he 
had many friends of old. And  the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide, 
and they saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the mustering of Orcs; 
and  the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the  lands; and  they heard 
news  of the  escape  of  Gollum.  And they sent a messenger to  bring these 
tidings to me. 
     `So it  was  that when summer  waned, there came a night of  moon,  and 
Gwaihir the Windlord,  swiftest of  the  Great Eagles,  came unlooked-for to 
Orthanc; and he found me standing  on the pinnacle. Then I  spoke to him and 
he bore me away, before Saruman was aware.  I was far from Isengard, ere the 
wolves and orcs issued from the gate to pursue me. 
     ` "How far can you bear me? " I said to Gwaihir. 
     ` "Many  leagues," said he,  "but not to  the ends of the earth.  I was 
sent to bear tidings not burdens." 
     ` "Then I must have a steed on land," I said, "and a steed surpassi ngly 
swift, for I have never had such need of haste before." 
     ` "Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord  of Rohan sits in his 
halls," he said; "for that  is not very far off." And I was glad, for in the 

####-Riddermark of Rohan the  Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, dwell, and  there are no 
horses  like  those that  are  bred in  that  great vale  between the  Misty 
Mountains and the White. 
     ` "Are the Men of  Rohan still to be trusted, do you think? " I said to 
Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith. 
     ` "They pay a tribute of horses," he answered, "and send many yearly to 
Mordor,  or  so it is said; but they are  not  yet under the  yoke.  But  if 
Saruman  has  become evil,  as  you  say, then  their  doom  cannot  be long 
delayed." 
     `He  set  me down  in  the  land of  Rohan ere  dawn;  and  now I  have 
lengthened my tale over long. The  rest must be more brief. In Rohan I found 
evil already at work:  the lies  of Saruman; and the king  of the land would 
not  listen to my warnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose 
one much to my liking. but little to his. I took the best horse in his land, 
and I have never seen the like of him.' 
     'Then  he must be a noble beast indeed,' said Aragorn; 'and  it grieves 
me more than many tidings that might seem worse to  learn that Sauron levies 
such tribute. It was not so when last I was in that land.' 
     `Nor is it now, I  will swear,' said Boromir.  `It  is a lie that comes 
from the Enemy.  I  know  the Men of Rohan;  true  a nd  valiant, our allies,  
dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.' 
     `The  shadow  of  Mordor  lies  on  distant lands,'  answered  Aragorn. 
'Saruman has fallen under  it.  Rohan is beset. Who knows what you will find 
there, if ever you return?' 
     `Not this at least.' said Boromir, 'that they will buy their lives with 
horses. They  love  their horses next  to their kin. And not without reason, 
for the horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North, far from 
the Shadow. and their race, as  that of their masters, is descended from the 
free days of old.' 
     'True indeed!'  said Gandalf. `And there is  one among them that  might 
have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of  the Nine cannot 
vie with him; tireless,   swift as the  flowing  wind. Shadowfax  they called 
him. By day  his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade, 
and  he  passes unseen. Light  is his footfall!  Never  before had  any  man 
mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and  so speedily he bore me that 
I  reached the Shire when  Frodo  was on the  Barrow-downs, though I set out 
from Rohan only when he set out from Hobbiton. 

####-     'But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings of 
the Riders, and though I gained  on them day by day,  they were  ever before 
me.  They had divided their  forces, I learned: some remained on the eastern 
borders,  not far  from the Greenway. and  some  invaded the Shire  from the  
south.  I came  to  Hobbiton  and Frodo  had gone; but I had words with  old 
Gamgee.  Many  words and  few to  the  point. He  had much to  say about the 
shortcomings of the new owners of Bag End. 
     ` "I can't abide changes," said he, "not  at my time of life, and least  
of all changes  for  the worst." "Changes for the  worst," he repeated  many 
times. 
     ' "Worst is a bad word," I said to him, "and I hope you do not  live to 
see it." But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbiton 
less than a week before, and that a  black horseman had come to the Hill the 
same  evening. Then I rode  on  in  fear. I came to Buckland and found it in 
uproar, as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I came 
to  the house at  Crickhollow, and  it was broken open and empty; but on the 
threshold there lay a  cloak  that had  been Frodo's. Then for a while  hope 
left me, and I did not wait  to gather news, or I might have been comforted; 
but I rode on the trail of the Riders. It was  hard to  follow, for  it went 
many ways, and  I was at a loss. But  it  seemed  to me that one  or two had 
ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, for I thought  of words that might  
be said to the innkeeper. 
     ' "Butterbur they call him," thought I. "If this delay was his fault, I 
will melt  all the butter in him. I  will roast the  old  fool  over a  slow 
fire."  He expected no  less, and when he saw  my face he fell down flat and 
began to melt on the spot.' 
     `What did you  do  to  him?' cried  Frodo in alarm. 'He was really very 
kind to us and did a ll that he could.' 
     Gandalf laughed.  'Don't be afraid!' he  said. `I  did not bite,  and I 
barked very little. So  overjoyed was I by  the news that I got out of  him, 
when he stopped  quaking, that I embraced  the old fellow. How it happened I 
could  not  then  guess, but I  learned  that you had been in Bree the night 
before, and had gone off that morning with Strider. 
     ` "Strider! " I cried, shouting for joy. 
     `  "Yes,  sir, I am afraid so, sir," said Butterbur, mistaking me.  "He 
got  at them,  in spite of all that I could do, and  they took  up with him. 
They behaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful, you might say." 

####-     ` "Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!  " said I. "It's  the 
best news I have had since midsummer: it's worth a gold piece at  the least. 
May  your  beer be  laid under an enchantment of surpassing  excellence  for  
seven years! " said  I. "Now I can take a night's  rest, the first  since  I 
have forgotten when." 
     `So I  stayed  there that  night, wondering much what had become of the 
Riders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree, it seemed.  But 
in the night we heard more. Five at least came from the west, and they threw 
down  the gates  and passed  through Bree  like  a  howling  wi nd;  and  the 
Bree-folk are still shivering and  expecting the end of the world. I got  up 
before dawn and went after them. 
     'I do not  know, but it seems clear  to me that this is  what happened. 
Their  Captain remained  in secret away  south of Bree, while two rode ahead 
through the village,  and four more  invaded the Shire. But when these  were 
foiled  in Bree  and  at Crickhollow, they  returned to their  Captain  with 
tidings, and so left the Road unguarded for  a while, except by their spies. 
The Captain then sent some eastward straight across country, and he  himself 
with the rest rode along the Road in great wrath. 
     'I galloped to Weathertop like  a gale, and I reached it before sundown 
on  my  second day from  Bree-and they were there befor e me.  They drew 
away 
from  me, for  they  felt the coming of my anger and they dared not  face it 
while the Sun  was  in the sky.  But they closed  round at  night, and I was 
besieged on the hill-top, in the old ring of Amon Syl. I was hard  put to it 
indeed:  such light and flame  cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the 
war-beacons of old. 
     `At sunrise I  escaped and fled towards the north. I  could not hope to 
do  more. It was impossible to  find you, Frodo, in  the wilderness, and  it 
would ha ve been folly  to try  with all the Nine  at  my heels. So I  had to 
trust  to Aragorn.  But I  hoped  to draw  some  of them  off, and yet reach 
Rivendell ahead of you  and send out help. Four Riders did indeed follow me, 
but they turned back  after a  wh ile and made  for the Ford,  it seems. That 
helped a  little,  for there  were only five, not  nine,  when your camp was 
attacked. 
     'I  reached here at last  by  a long  hard  road,  up the Hoarwell  and 
through the  Ettenmoors, and down from the north . It took me nearly fourteen 
days  from  Weathertop,  for  I  could  not  ride  among  the rocks  of  the 

####-troll-fells, and  Shadowfax departed.  I sent  him back to his master; but a  
great friendship has grown between us, and if I have need he will come at my 
call.  But so it  was  that I  came to Rivendell  only three days before the 
Ring, and news of  its peril had already been brought here-which proved well 
indeed. 
     `And  that, Frodo, is  the end of my account. May Elrond and the others 
forgive  the length of  it.  But such a thing has not happened  before, that 
Gandalf broke tryst and did not come  when  he  promised. An account to  the 
Ring-bearer of so strange an event was required, I think. 
     'Well, the  Tale is now  told, from first to last. Here we all are, and 
here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any  nearer to our  purpose. What 
shall we do with it?' 
     There was silence. At last Elrond spoke again. 
     `This  is grievous news concerning Saruman,' he  said; `for  we trusted 
him and he  is deep in  all our counsels. It is perilous to study too deeply 
the arts of the Enemy, for  good  or  for ill. But such falls and betrayals,  
alas, have happened before. Of  the tales that  we have heard  this  day the 
tale  of  Frodo was most strange  to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo 
here; and it seems to me that he is  perhaps  not so alone and singular as I 
had thought him. The world has changed much since I last was on the 
westward 
roads. 
     `The  Barrow-wights we know by  many names; and of the Old Forest  
many 
tales have been told: all that now remains is but an outlier of its northern 
march. Time was when a squirrel could go from tree to tree from what  is now 
the  Shire to Dunland west of Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, and 
many things wild and strange I knew. But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeed 
this is still the same that walked the woods and  hills long  ago, and  even 
then was older than the old. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben -adar we 
called  him,  oldest and  fatherless. But many another name he has since been  
given by other folk:  Forn by the Dwarves,  Orald by Northern Men, and other  
names beside. He is a strange creature, but maybe I should have summoned 
him 
to our Council.' 
     `He would not have come,' said Gandalf. 
     `Could  we not still send messages to him  and obtain his help?'  asked 

####-Erestor. `It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.' 
     `No, I should not put  it so,'  said Gandalf. `Say rather that the Ring 
has no power over him. He is  his own master.  But he  cannot alter  the Ring 
itself,  nor break its  power over  others.  And now he is withdrawn  into a  
little  land,  within  bounds that  he  has set, though none  can  see them, 
waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will not  step beyond them.' 
     `But within those bounds nothing seems to  dismay him,'  said  Erestor. 
`Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever harmless?' 
     `No,' said Gandalf, `not willingly. He might  do so,  if all  the  free 
folk of the world begged  him, but he would not understand the need. And  if 
he were given  the Ring,  he would soon  forget  it, or most likely throw it 
away. Such  things  have  no hold on his mind. He  would  be  a  most unsafe 
guardian; and that alone is answer enough. ' 
     `But in any case,' said Glorfindel, `to send the Ring to him would only 
postpone the day of evil. He  is far away. We could not now take  it back to 
him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy.  And even if we could, soon or late the 
Lord of  the Rings wou ld learn of  its hiding place and  would bend  all his 
power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not. 
I think that in the end, if all  else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last 
as he was First; and then Night will come.' 
     `I know little of Iarwain save the name,' said Galdor; `but Glorfindel, 
I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless  such power  
is  in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron  can torture and destroy 
the very hills. What power still remains lies with us,  here in Imladris, or  
with Cirdan at the Havens, or in Lurien. But have they the strength, have we 
here the strength to withstand the Enemy, the  coming of Sauron at the last, 
when all else is overthrown?' 
     `I have not the strength,' said Elrond; `neither have they.' 
     `Then if the  Ring cannot be  kept  from him for ever by strength' said 
Glorfindel, `two things only remain  for  us to attempt: to send it over the 
Sea, or to destroy it.' 
     `But Gandalf has revealed to u s that  we cannot destroy it by any craft  
that we here possess,' said Elrond. `And they who dwell beyond the Sea would 
not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who 
still dwell here to deal with it.' 
     'Then, said Glorfindel, 'let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the 
lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that  even at the Council his 

####-feet were already on a crooked path. He knew that the Ring  was not lost for  
ever, but wished us to think so; for  he began to lust  for  it for himself. 
Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.' 
     `Not safe  for ever,' said Gandalf. `There are many things in the  deep 
waters; and seas and lands may  change. And it is not our part here to  take 
thought only for a  season, or for a few lives  of Men, or for a passing age 
of the world.  We should seek a final  end of this menace, even if we do not 
hope to make one.' 
     'And that we shall not find on the roads to the  Sea,' said Galdor. 'If 
the  return to Iarwain be  thought too dangerous, then  flight to the S‚a is 
now fraught with gravest peril. My heart tells me that Sauron will expect us 
to take the western way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The 
Nine have been unhorsed indeed but that is  but a respite, ere they find  new 
steeds and  swifter. Only the waning might of Gondor stands  now between him 
and a march  in power along the  coasts into  the  North;  and if  he comes, 
assailing the White Towers and the  Havens, hereafter the Elves may  have no 
escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.' 
     'Long yet will that march be delayed,' said Boromir. 'Gondor wanes, you  
say.  But  Gondor stands,  and even the end  of its strength  is  still very 
strong.' 
     'And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back  the Nine,' said Galdor. 
'And other roads he may find that Gondor does not guard.' 
     'Then,' said Erestor, `there are but two courses, as Glorfindel already 
has declared:  to hide  the Ring  for ever;  or to  unmake it.  But both are 
beyond our power. Who will read this riddle for us?' 
     'None here can do so,' said Elrond gravely. `At least none can foretell 
what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me now 
clear which is the road that  we must take. The westward road seems easiest.  
Therefore it must  be shunned. It will be watched. Too  often the Elves have 
fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen. 
There  lies our hope, if hope it be. To walk into  peril-to  Mordor. We must 
send the Ring to the Fire.' 
     Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house,  looking out upon a  
sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness in 
his heart. Boromir  stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He  was finger ing  his 
great horn and frowning. At length he spoke. 
     'I do not understand all this,' he said. `Saruman is a traitor, but did 

####-he not have  a  glimpse of  wisdom?  Why  do  you speak  ever of  hiding and 
destroying? Why should we not think  that the  Great Ring  has come into our 
hands to serve us in the very  hour of need? Wielding  it the Free  Lords of 
the Free may surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears, I deem. 
     'The  Men of Gondor are valiant, and they  will never  submit; but they 
may be  beaten down. Valour needs first strength, and then a weapon. Let the 
Ring be  your  weapon, if it has such power as you say. Take it and go forth  
to victory!' 
     'Alas, no,' said  Elrond. 'We cannot use  the Ruling  Ring. That we now 
know  too well.  It belongs to  Sauron and was  made by  him  alone,  and is 
altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone  to wield at 
will, save only those who have already a great power  of their own.  But for 
them it holds an  even deadlier peril.  The very  desire of it  corrupts the 
heart. Consider  Saruman. If any of the Wise should with this Ring overthrow 
the  Lord  of Mordor,  using  his own arts,  he  would then  set  himself on 
Sauron's throne, and yet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is another  
reason  why the  Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in the  world it 
will be a danger  even to  the Wise. For nothing  is evil in the  beginning. 
Even Sauron was not so. I fear to  take the Ring to hide it. I will not take 
the Ring to wield it.' 
     `Nor I,' said Gandalf. 
     Boromir looked at  them doubtfully,  but he bowed his head. `So be it,' 
he said. `Then in Gondor we must trust  to  such weapons as we have.  And at 
the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayhap the 
Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide --  if the hand that wields it 
has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.' 
     `Who can tell?' said Aragorn. `But we will put it to the test one day.' 
     `May the  day not be too long delayed,' said Boromir. 'For though  I do 
not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort  us to know that others fought 
also with all the means that they have.' 
     `Then  be comforted,'  said  Elrond.  `For  there are  other powers and 
realms that  you know not, and  they are hidden from you.  Anduin  the Great 
flows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.' 
     'Still it might be  well for all,' said Gluin the Dwarf,  'if all these 
strengths were joined, and  the powers  of each  were used in  league. Other  
rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be  used in  our need.  The 
Seven are lost  to us  -- if Balin has not found the ring of Thrur which  was 

####-the last; naught has been heard of it since Thrur  perished in Moria. Indeed 
I  may  now reveal that it was partly in  hope to find that  ring that Balin 
went away.' 
     `Balin will find no  ring in  Moria,'  said  Gandalf. `Thrur gave it to 
Thrbin his  son,  but not Thrbin to Thorin. It was taken  with  torment from 
Thrbin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.' 
     'Ah, alas!' cried Gluin.  'When will  the day come of our  revenge? But 
still there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves? Very mighty 
Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made by 
the Dark  Lord long ago. Are  they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they not 
say?' 
     The  Elves returned  no answer.  `Did you not  hear  me,  Gluin?'  said 
Elrond.  `The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch them. But 
of them it  is not permitted to speak. So much only in this' hour of doubt I 
may now say. They are not idle. But they were  not made as weapons of war or  
conquest:  that is  not  their power.  Those who  made  them did  not desire 
strength or  domination or  hoarded wealth, but understanding,  making,  and 
healing,  to preserve  all  things  unstained.  These things  the  Elves  of 
Middle-earth have in  some measure gained,  though with sorrow. But all that 
has  been wrought  by those who wield the Three will turn  to their undoing,  
and their minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron, if he regains the 
One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his purpose.' 
     `But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring  were  destroyed as you  
counsel?' asked Gluin. 
     'We know not for certain,' answered  Elrond sadly. `Some hope that  the 
Three Rings,  which Sauron  has never touched,  would  then become free, and 
their  rulers might heal  the  hurts of  the world that he has wrought.  But 
maybe  when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will 
fade and be forgotten. That is my belief.' 
     `Yet all  the Elves are willing to endure this chance,' said Glorfindel 
'if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion be  
taken away for ever.' 
     'Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,' said Erestor, 
`and  yet we come  no  nearer. What  strength have we for the finding of the 
Fire in which  it was made? That  is  the path of despair. Of folly I  would  
say, if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid me.' 
     'Despair, or folly?' said Gandalf.  `It is not  despair, for despair is 

####-only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not.  It is wisdom to 
recognize  necessity,  when all  other courses have been  weighed, though as 
folly it may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our 
cloak, a veil before the eyes of the  Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs 
all  things to a nicety in  the scales  of his malice. But the only  measure 
that he knows is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into 
his  heart  the thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that  having 
the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of 
reckoning.' 
     'At  least  for a while,' said  Elrond. `The road must  be trod, but it 
will  be very hard. And neither strength nor  wisdom will  carry us far upon 
it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong. 
Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small  
hands do them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.' 
     'Very  well,  very well,  Master Elrond!'  said Bilbo suddenly. 'Say no 
more! It  is plain  enough  what you are  pointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit 
started this  affair, and Bilbo had better finish it, or himself. I was very 
comfortable here, and getting  on  with my  book.  If you want to know, I am 
just  writing  an  ending  for it.  I had   thought of putting: and  he lived 
happily ever afterwards  to the end of  his days.  It is a  good ending, and 
none the worse for having been used before. Now  I shall have to alter that: 
it does not look  like coming true;  and anyway there will evidently have to 
be  several  more chapters, if  I live to  write  them.  It  is  a frightful 
nuisance. When ought I to start?  
     ' Boromir  looked  in surprise  at Bilbo, but the laughter died  on his 
lips  when he saw that  all the others regarded  the  old  hobbit with grave 
respect. Only Gluin smiled, but his smile came from old memories.  
     `Of course,  my dear Bilbo,' said Gandalf. `If  you had  really started 
this affair,  you might be expected to finish  it. But you know  well enough 
now that starting is too great a claim for  any, and that only  a small part 
is played in  great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was 
meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you  are  making a valiant offer. 
But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has 
passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your  part is 
ended,  unless  as a  recorder.  Finish  your book,  and  leave  the  ending 
unaltered! There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when 
they come back.' 

####-     Bilbo laughed. `I have never known you give me pleasant advice before.' 
he said.  `As  all your  unpleasant  advice has been  good, I wonder if this 
advice is not  bad. Still, I don't suppose I have the strength  or luck left  
to deal with the Ring. It has  grown, and I have  not.  But tell me: what do 
you mean by they?' 
     `The messengers who are sent with the Ring.' 
     `Exactly! And who are  they to be?  That seems to me  what this Council  
has to decide, and all  that  it has to decide. Elves  may  thrive on speech 
alone, and Dwarves endure great weariness;  but I am only an old hobbit, and 
I miss  my meal at noon. Can't you think of some  names  now?  Or put it off 
till after dinner?' 
     No one answered. The  noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo glanced 
at all the faces, but they were not  turned to him. All the Council sat with 
downcast eyes,  as if in deep  thought. A great dread fell on him,  as if he 
was  awaiting  the pronouncement of some doom that he had long  foreseen  and 
vainly  hoped might after all never be spoken.  An  overwhelming longing  to 
rest and remain at peace by Bilbo's side in Rivendell filled all  his heart. 
At last with an effort  he spoke, and wondered to hear his  own words, as if 
some other will was using his small voice. 
     `I will take the Ring,' he said, `though I do not know the way.' 
     Elrond raised  his eyes and looked  at  him, and Frodo felt  his  heart 
pierced by the sudden keenness  of the glance. `If  I understand aright  all 
that I  have heard,' he said, `I think that this task  is appointed for you, 
Frodo; and that if you do not find a way, no  one will. This is the hour  of 
the Shire-folk, when they arise from  their quiet fields to shake the towers 
and counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise  could  have foreseen it? Or,  
if they are wise, why  should they expect  to know it,  until  the hour  has 
struck? 
     `But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that  none could lay it on another. 
I do not lay it  on  you. But  if you  take it freely, I  will say that your 
choice  is right;  and though all the mighty elf-friends of  old, Hador, and 
H®rin, and T®rin, and Beren himself were assembled together your seat 
should 
be among them.' 
     `But you won't send him off alone surely, Mast er?' cried Sam, unable to 
contain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner where he had been 
quietly sitting on the floor. 

####-     `No indeed!'  said Elrond, turning towards  him with a smile.  `You  at 
least shall go with him. It  is  hardly  possi ble to separate  you from him, 
even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.' 
     Sam sat  down, blushing and muttering.  `A nice  pickle we  have landed  
ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!' he said, shaking his head. 
 

####- 

Chapter 3. The Ring Goes South 

 
 
     Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room. 
Merry  and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the 
Council, and had been chosen as Frodo's companion. 
     `It's most  unfair,' said  Pippin. `Instea d of  throwing  him out,  and 
clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!' 
     `Rewards!'  said Frodo.  'I can't imagine a more severe punishment. You  
are not  thinking what  you  are saying:  condemned  to  go on this hopeless 
journey, a  reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my  task  was done, and I could 
rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.' 
     'I don't wonder,' said Merry, 'and I wish you could. But we are envying 
Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be  a punishment for any of us 
to  be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have  come a long way with you and 
been through some stiff times. We want to go on.' 
     `That's  what  I  meant,'  said  Pippin. `We  hobbits  ought  to  stick  
together, and  we will. I shall go,  unless they chain me up.  There must be 
someone with intelligence in the party.' 
     'Then  you certainly will not  be chosen, Peregrin Took!' said Gandalf, 
looking in through  the window, which was  near the ground. `But you are all 
worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided yet.' 
     `Nothing  decided!' cried Pippin. 'Then what  were  you  all doing? You  
were shut up for hours.' 
     "Talking,' said Bilbo. `There was a deal  of  talk, and everyone had an 
eye-opener. Even old Gandalf.  I think  Legolas's  bit  of news  about Gollum 
caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.' 
     `You were wrong,'  said Gandalf. 'You  were  inattentive. I had already 
heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, as 
you put  it,  were you  and Frodo;  and  I was  the  only  one  that was not 
surprised.' 
     `Well,  anyway,'  said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor  
Frodo  and Sam. I was  afraid all  the time that it might come to that, if I 
was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the 
reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?' 
     'Yes,' said the wizard. `Some of the scouts have been sent out already. 

####-More will go  tomorrow.  Elrond is sending Elves, and they will get in touch 
with the Rangers, and maybe  with  Thranduil's folk in Mirkwood. And 
Aragorn 
has gone with Elrond's  sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for  
many long  leagues before any  move is  made. So cheer  up, Frodo! You  will 
probably make quite a long stay here.' 
     'Ah!' said  Sam gloomily.  'We'll  just wait long enough for  winter to 
come.' 
     'That can't be  helped,' said Bilbo.  'It's your fault partly, Frodo my 
lad: insisting on waiting  for my  birthday. A  funny way of honouring it, I 
can't help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B .s 
into Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill spring; and you can't  
go till the reports come back. 
     When winter first begins to bite  
     and stones crack in the frosty night, 
     when pools are black and trees are bare, 
     'tis evil in the Wild to fare. 
     But that I am afraid will be just your luck.' 
     'I am  afraid  it  will,' said Gandalf. 'We  can't start until  we have 
found out about the Riders.' 
     `I thought they were all destroyed in the flood,' said Merry. 
     'You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,' said Gandalf. `The power of 
their master  is in them, and  they stand or fall by  him. We hope that they 
were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made  for a while less dangerous;  but 
we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your  
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to  help you; but I will 
whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in  
the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you.' 
     So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the 
window-sill, where he  had been sitting, and took off his hat and  bowed. 'I  
only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything yet. In this matter  
Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me, 
I want to see Elrond. I must be off.' 
     `How long  do you  think I  shall have here?' said  Frodo to Bilbo when 
Gandalf had gone. 
     `Oh,  I don't know. I can't count  days in Rivendell,' said Bilbo. 'But 
quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helping 

####-me with my book, and making a  start  on the next?  Have you  thought of  an 
ending?' 
     'Yes, several, a nd all are dark and unpleasant,' said Frodo. 
     'Oh, that won't do!' said Bilbo. `Books ought to have good endings. How 
would this do:  and they all  settled  down and  lived together happily ever 
after?' 
     `It will do well, if it ever comes to that,' said Frodo. 
     'Ah!' said Sam. 'And where will they live? That's what I often wonder.' 
     For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the past journey 
and of the perils  that  lay ahead; but such  was the  virtue of the land of 
Rivendell that soon all  fear  and anxiety was lifted  from their minds. The 
future, good or  ill, was not forgotten, but ceased to have  any  power over  
the present. Health and hope grew strong in them, and they were content with 
each good day as it came, taking plea sure in every  meal,  and in every word 
and song. 
     So the days slipped away, as  each morning dawned  bright and fair, and 
each evening followed cool and clear. But autumn was waning fast; slowly the 
golden light  faded to pale silver, and the  lingering leaves fell  from the 
naked trees. A wind began to  blow  chill  from  the  Misty Mountains to the 
east. The Hunter's Moon waxed round in the  night sky, and put to flight all 
the  lesser stars. But low  in the South one star shone red. Every night, as 
the  Moon  waned  again,  it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it 
from his window, deep in the heavens burning like a watchful eye that glared 
above the trees on the brink of the valley. 
     The hobbits had been nearly  two  months  in the House  of  Elrond, and 
November  had  gone by  with the  last  shreds  of autumn, and  December was 
passing, when the scouts  began to  return. Some  had  gone north beyond the 
springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors;  and others had gone west,  and  
with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the 
Greyflood, as far as Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed  the river by 
a ruined town. Many had gone east and south; and some  of these had  crossed 
the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbed the pass at the 
source of the Gladden River, and had come  down into Wilderland and over the 
Gladden  Fields  and so at  length had reached the old  home  of Radagast at 
Rhosgobel. Radagast was not there; and they had  returned over the high pass 
that was called the Dimrill Stair. The sons of Elrond, Elladan and  Elrohir, 
were the  last  to return;  they had  made a great journey, passing down the 

####-Silverlode into  a strange country, but of their errand they would not speak 
to any save to Elrond. 
     In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings  of the 
Riders  or other  servants of the  Enemy. Even from the Eagles of the  Misty 
Mountains they had learned no fresh news. Nothing had been seen  or heard of 
Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again far  
up the Great River. Three of the black horses had been found at once drowned 
in  the flooded Ford.  On  the  rocks  of  the  rapids  below  it  searchers 
discovered the bodies of five more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and 
tattered. Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was 
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the North.  
     'Eight  out of the Nine are  accounted for at least, ' said Gandalf. 'It 
is  rash  to  be  too  sure,  yet I think that  we  may hope  now  that  the 
Ringwraiths  were  scattered,  and  have been obliged to return as best they 
could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.  
     `If that  is so,  it wi ll be some time before they  can begin the  hunt 
again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to journey 
all the way to  the borders of Rivendell before they can pick  up our trail. 
And  if we are  careful that  will be  hard to find.  But  we  must delay no 
longer.' 
     Elrond  summoned the hobbits to him.  He looked gravely  at Frodo. 'The 
time has  come,' he said.  `If the Ring is to set out, it  must go soon. But 
those who go with it must  not  count on their  errand being aided by  war or 
force.  They  must pass into the domain of  the Enemy far from  aid. Do  you  
still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?' 
     'I do,' said Frodo. `I will go with Sam.' 
     `Then  I cannot help you  much, not even with counsel,' said Elrond. `I  
can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is to be achieved  I 
do not know. The  Shadow has  crept now  to the  feet  of the Mountains, and 
draws nigh even  to  the  borders of Greyflood; and  under the Shadow all is 
dark to me. You will meet many foes, some open, and some disguised; and  
you 
may find friends upon your way when you  least look for it. I will send  out 
messages, such  as I can contrive, to  those  whom I know in the wide world;  
but so  perilous are the  lands now become that some  may well  miscarry, or  
come no quicker than you yourself.  
     `And I will choose you companions to go with  you, as far as  they will 

####-or fortune  allows. The number must be  few, since your hope is in speed and 
secrecy. Had  I a host of Elves  in armour of the Elder Days, it would avail 
little, save to arouse the power of Mordor. 
     `The Company of the Ring  shall be Nine;  and the Nine Walkers shall be 
set  against  the  Nine Riders  that are  evil. With you and  your  faithful 
servant, Gandalf will go;  for this shall be his  great task,  and maybe the 
end of his labours.  
     `For  the  rest, they  shall represent the  other  Free Peoples  of the 
World:  Elves, Dwarves, and  Men. Legolas  shall be for the Elves; and Gimli 
son of Gluin for the Dwarves. They are willing to go at least  to the passes 
of the  Mountains,  and maybe beyond. For men you shall have  Aragorn son of 
Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.' 
     `Strider!' said Frodo. 
     'Yes,' he  said  with  a  smile.  `I ask  leave  once again to be  your 
companion, Frodo.' 
     `I would have begged you to come,' said Frodo, 'only I thought you were 
going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.' 
     `I am,' said  Aragorn. `And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be reforged 
ere I  set out to  war. But your road  and our  road  lie  together for many 
hundreds  of  miles. Therefore Boromir  will also be in the Company. He is a 
valiant man.' 
     'There remain  two more  to  be  found,'  said  Elrond.  "These  I will 
consider. Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.' 
     `But  that will leave  no place for  us!'  cried Pippin in  dismay. `We 
don't want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.' 
     `That  is  because  you do not understand a nd cannot imagine what  lies 
ahead,' said Elrond. 
     `Neither  does Frodo,'  said  Gandalf,  unexpectedly supporting Pippin. 
'Nor do  any of us see clearly. It is true that  if these hobbits understood 
the danger, they would  not dare to go. But they wou ld  still wish to go, or  
wish that  they dared, and be shamed  and unhappy.  I think, Elrond, that in 
this matter it  would be well to  trust  rather  to their friendship than to 
great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an elf-lord,  such as  Glorfindel, he 
could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open the road  to the Fire by the  power 
that is in him.' 
     `You  speak  gravely,'  said Elrond, `but  I am in doubt. The Shire,  I 
forebode,  is not free now from peril;  and these two I had thought to  send 

####-back there as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of 
their country, to warn the people of their danger. In any case, I judge that 
the younger of these two, Peregrin Took,  should remain. My heart is against 
his going.' 
     `Then, Master Elrond, you will have to  lock  me in prison,  or send me 
home  tied in  a  sack,'  said  Pippin. `For  otherwise  I shall follow  the 
Company.' 
     `Let it be so then. You shall go,' said Elrond, and he sighed. 'Now the 
tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company must depart.' 
     The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on its blade 
was traced  a device  of seven  stars set between the crescent Moon and  the 
rayed Sun,  and  about  them  was written  many  runes; for  Aragorn son  of 
Arathorn  was going to war upon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was  that 
sword  when it was made whole again; the light of the sun shone redly in it, 
and the light of the  moon shone cold, and its edge  was hard and  keen. And 
Aragorn gave it a new name and called it And®ril, Flame of the West. 
     Aragorn and Gandalf walked together  or sat speaking of  their road and 
the  perils they  would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps 
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with 
them; but  he was content to  lean on their guidance,  and he spent  as much 
time as he could with Bilbo. 
     In those  last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall 
of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren 
and L®thien and the winning of the  Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry 
and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were  to be found with Bilbo in 
his  own small  room.  Then Bilbo would  read  passages from his book (which 
still seemed very incomplete). or scraps of his verses, or  would take notes 
of Frodo's adventures.  
     On the morning of the last day Frodo  was alone with Bilbo, and the old 
hobbit  pulled  out from under his bed a wooden box.  He lifted  the lid and 
fumbled inside. 
     'Here  is your sword,' he said. 'But it was broken, you know. I took it 
to  keep it safe but I've  forgotten to ask if the smiths  could mend it. No 
time now..  So I thought, perhaps,  you would care to have this,  don't  you  
know?' 
     He took from the box  a small sword in an old shabby leathern scabbard.  
Then he drew it, and  its polished and well -tended blade glittered suddenly, 

####-cold  and bright. 'This is Sting,' he said, and thrust it with little effort 
deep into a wooden beam. `Take it, if  you like.  I shan't want  it again, I 
expect.' 
     Frodo accepted it gratefully. 
     'Also there is this!' said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed to 
be rather  heavy for  its size. He unwound several folds of  old cloth,  and 
held up a  small shirt of  mail. It was close-woven of many  rings, as supple 
almost as linen, cold as ice,  and  harder than steel. It shone like moonlit 
silver,  and  was studded  with white gems. With it  was a belt of pearl and 
crystal. 
     'It's  a pretty thing,  isn't it?'  said Bilbo, moving it in the light. 
`And  useful.  It  is my dwarf-mail that  Thorin gave me. I got it back from 
Michel Delving before I started,  and packed  it with my  luggage: I brought  
all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, except the Ring. But I did not 
expect to use this, and I don't need it  now, except to  look  at sometimes. 
You hardly feel any weight when you put it on.' 
     `I  should look -- well, I don't think I should look right in it,' said 
Frodo. 
     `Just what I sa id myself,' said Bilbo. 'But never mind about looks. You  
can wear it under your  outer clothes.  Come  on! You must share this secret  
with me. Don't tell anybody else! But I should  feel happier  if I knew  you  
were wearing it.  I have a fancy it would turn even the  knives of the Black  
Riders,' he ended in a low voice. 
     `Very  well, I will take  it,' said  Frodo. Bilbo  put  it  on him, and 
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the top his 
old weather -stained breeches, tunic, and jacket. 
     'Just a  plain hobbit you  look,' said Bilbo.  'But there is more about 
you now than  appears  on the surface. Good luck to you!' He turned away and 
looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune. 
     'I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo,  for this, and for all our past  
kindnesses,' said Frodo. 
     'Don't try!' said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping him on the 
back.  `Ow!' he cried. `You are  too  hard  now  to slap! But there you are: 
Hobbits must stick together, and especially  Bagginses. All I  ask in return 
is: take  as much care of yourself as you can. and  bring  back all the news 
you can, and  any old  songs and  tales you can come by. I'll do  my best to 
finish my book before you return. I should like to write the second book, if 

####-I am spared.' He broke off and turned to the window again, singing softly. 
 
     I sit beside the fire and think 
     of all that I have seen, 
     of meadow-flowers and butterflies 
     in summers that have been; 
 
     Of yellow leaves and gossamer 
     in autumns that there were, 
     with morning mist and silver sun 
     and wind upon my hair. 
 
     I sit beside the fire and think 
     of how the world will be 
     when winter comes without a spring 
     that I shall ever see. 
 
     For still  there are so many things 
     that I have never seen: 
     in every wood in every spring 
     there is a different green. 
 
     I sit beside the fire and think 
     of people long ago, 
     and people who will see a world  
     that I shall never know.  
 
     But all the while I sit and think 
     of times there were before, 
     I listen for returning feet 
     and voices at the door. 
 
     It was  a  cold grey  day near the end of  December.  The East Wind was 
streaming through  the  bare branches of the trees, and seething in the dark 
pines on the hills. Ragged clouds  were hurrying overhead,  dark and low. As 
the cheerless shadows  of the early evening began  to  fall the Company made 
ready to set out. They were to start at dusk, for Elrond  counselled them to 

####-journey  under cover  of night as often as  they could,  until they were far 
from Rivendell. 
     `You should fear the many eyes  of the servants of Sauron,' he said. 'I  
do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached 
him,  and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his spies on foot  and  wing  
will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the  sky above you must beware 
as you go on your way.' 
     The Company took little gear of war,  for their hope was in secrecy not 
in battle. Aragorn had And®ril  but no other weapon, and he went  forth clad 
only in rusty green and brown. as a  Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a 
long sword,  in fashion like And®ril but of less  lineage and he bore also a  
shield and his war-horn. 
     'Loud and  clear it sounds  in the valleys of the hills,' he said, `and 
then  let all the foes  of Gondor  flee!' Putting  it to  his lips he blew a  
blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that voice 
in Rivendell sprang to their feet. 
     Slow  should you  be to  wind  that  horn again,  Boromir, said Elrond. 
'until you stand once more on the  borders of your land, and dire need is on 
you.' 
     `Maybe,' said Boromir.  'But always I have let my  horn cry  at setting 
forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth 
as a thief in the night.' 
     Gimli the  dwarf alone wore  openly  a short shirt of steel-rings,  for  
dwarves make  light  of burdens;  and in  his  belt was a  broad-bladed axe. 
Legolas had  a bow and a  quiver,  and  at his belt a long  white knife. The 
younger  hobbits wore the swords that they had  taken  from the  barrow; but 
Frodo took only Sting;  and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden. 
Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was  the elven-sword Glamdring, 
the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon  the breast of Thorin under the Lonely 
Mountain. 
     All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and they had 
jackets and cloaks lined with  fur. Spare food and clothes  and blankets and 
other needs were laden on a  pony, none other  than the poor beast that they 
had brought from Bree. 
     ?he stay  in Rivendell had  worked a  great wonder of change on him: he 
was  glossy and seemed  to  have  the vigour of youth.  It  was  Sam who had 
insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he called him) would pine, 

####-if he did not come. 
     `That  animal can nearly talk,' he said, `and  would talk, if he stayed 
here  much longer. He gave me a  look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak it: 
if you don't  let me go  with you, Sam, I'll follow  on my own.' So Bill was 
going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company that 
did not seem depressed. 
     Their  farewells had been  said in the great hall by the  fire, and they 
were only waiting now for  Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A 
gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in 
many windows. Bilbo  huddled in a cloak stood silent  on the doorstep beside 
Frodo.  Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully 
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey  shapes in the 
darkness.  
     Sam was  standing by the  pony, sucking  his teeth, and staring moodily 
into  the  gloom  where  the  river  roared  stonily below;  his  desire for  
adventure was at its lowest ebb. 
     `Bill,  my lad,' he said,  `you oughtn't to have took up  with us.  You  
could have stayed here and et the best hay  till the  new grass comes.' Bill 
swished his tail and said nothing. 
     Sam  eased the pack on  his shoulders, and  went over anxiously  in his 
mind all the things that he had stowed in it,  wondering if he had forgotten 
anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the  little  box of salt 
that he  always carried  and  refilled  when he  could;  a  good  supply  of 
pipe-weed (but not near enough,  I'll  warrant); flint  and tinder;  woollen 
hose:  linen;  various  small  belongings  of his  master's that  Frodo  had 
forgotten and Sam had  stowed to  bring them out in  triumph when they  were 
called for. He went through them all. 
     'Rope!'  he  muttered. `No  rope!  And  only  last night  you  said  to 
yourself: "Sam, what about a bit of rope? You'll want it, if you haven't got 
it:" Well, I'll wa nt it. I can't get it now.' 
     At that moment Elrond came out with  Gandalf, and he called the Company 
to him. 'This is my last  word,' he said in a low voice. 'The Ring-bearer is 
setting  out on the Quest  of  Mount Doom. On him  alone is any charge laid: 
neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy 
nor  indeed to  let any  handle  it,  save  members of  the Company  and the 
Council,  and  only then in  gravest need. The others  go  with him  as free 
companions,  to help him on his way.  You may tarry,  or come back, or  turn 

####-aside into other paths, as chance allows. The further you  go, the less easy 
will it be  to  withdraw; yet  no oath or bond is  laid on you to go further  
than you will. For you do not yet know the strength of  your hearts, and you  
cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.' 
     `Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,' said Gimli. 
     'Maybe,' said Elrond, `but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has 
not seen the nightfall. ' 
     'Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,' said Gimli. 
     `Or  break it,' said Elrond. `Look  not too far ahead! But  go now with 
good hearts!  Farewell, and may the  blessing of Elves and Men and  all Free 
Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!' 
     'Good . . . good luck!' cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. 'I don't 
suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall expect a  
full account when you get back. And don't be too long! Farewell!' 
     Many other s of Elrond's household stood in the shadows and watched them 
go, bidding them farewell  with soft  voices. There was no laughter, and  no  
song or music. At last they turned away and faded silently into the dusk. 
     They crossed  the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths  that 
led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length to the high 
moor where the wind hissed through the  heather. Then with one glance at the 
Last Homely House twinkling below them they strode away far into the night. 
     At  the  Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards went 
on  by  narrow paths  among the folded lands. Their purpose was to hold this 
course west of the Mountains  for many  miles and days. The country was 
much 
rougher  and  mor e barren  than  in  the  green vale of the  Great River  in 
Wilderland  on the other side of the range,  and  their going would be slow;  
but  they hoped  in  this way to  escape the notice of unfriendly  eyes. The 
spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom been seen in this empty country, and the 
paths were little known except to the people of Rivendell.  
     Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this  land 
even  in the dark.  The  others were in file behind, and  Legolas whose eyes 
were keen was the rearguard.  The first  part of their  journey was hard and 
dreary, and Frodo remembered little  of it, save the wind. For many  sunless 
days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed 
able  to keep out its searching fingers.  Though the Company was  well clad, 
they  seldom felt warm, either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during 

####-the middle of  the day,  in some  hollow of the land,  or  hidden under  the 
tangled  thorn-bushes  that  grew in  thickets in many places. In  the  late 
afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold and 
cheerless as  a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a  fire. In 
the  evening  they went on again, always  as nearly  southward as they could 
find a  way. 
     At  first  it seemed  to  the hobbits  that  although  they walked  and 
stumbled until  they were weary, they were creeping forward like snails, and  
getting nowhere. Each  day  the land looked much the same as  it had the day 
before. Yet steadily the  mountains were drawing nearer. South  of Rivendell 
they rose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the  feet  of the  main 
range there was tumbled an ever  wider land of bleak hills, and deep valleys 
filled with turbulent waters. Paths were few and winding, and led them often  
only to the edge of some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.  
     They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed. The wind 
suddenly fell and then  veered round to  the south. The swift -flowing clouds 
lifted and melted away, and the sun came out,  pale and bright. There came a 
cold clear dawn  at the  end of a long stumbling night-march. The travellers 
reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly -trees whose grey-green trunks 
seemed to have  been  bu ilt  out of the very  stone of the hills. Their dark 
leaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun. 
     Away  in the  south Frodo could  see the  dim shapes of lofty mountains 
that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company was taking. At the 
left of this high  range rose three peaks; the  tallest and nearest stood up 
like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still 
largely  in the  shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon  it,  it glowed 
red. 
     Gandalf stood  at Frodo's side and  looked out under his hand. `We have 
done well,' he said.  `We have reached the borders of the country  that  Men 
call Hollin; many Elves lived here  in happier  days,  when Eregion was  its 
name.  Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we  have come,  though  many 
long miles further our feet  have walked. The land and the weather  will  be 
milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.' 
     `Dangerous or  not, a  real sunrise  is  mighty  welcome,'  said Frodo, 
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face. 
     'But the mountains  are ahead of us,' said Pippin. `We must have turned 
eastwards in the night.' 

####-     'No,'  said Gandalf. 'But you  see further ahead in  the  clear  light. 
Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west. There are  many maps 
in 
Elrond's house, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?' 
     `Yes I did, sometimes,' said Pippin, `but I don't remember them.  Frodo 
has a better head for that sort of thing.' 
     `I need no map,' said  Gimli, who  had come  up  with Legolas,  and was 
gazing out before him with a strange  light in his deep eyes. `There is  the 
land where our fathers worked of old, and we have wrought the image of those 
mountains  into many works of metal  and of  stone, and into  many songs and 
tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, Shathyr. 
     `Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but I know 
them and their names, for under them lies  Khazad-dym, the Dwarrowdelf, that 
is  now  called  the Black Pit,  Moria in the Elvish  tongue.  Yonder stands 
Barazinbar, the  Redhorn, cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are Silvertine and 
Cloudyhead: Celebdil  the  White,  and  Fanuidhol  the Grey,  that  we  call 
Zirak-zigil and Bundushathyr. 
     `There the  Misty  Mountains  divide, and between  their  arms lies the 
deep-shadowed valley  which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale, 
which the Elves call Nanduhirion.' 
     `It is for the Dimrill Dale  that we are  making,' said Gandalf. `If we 
climb  the  pass that  is called the Redhorn Gate, under  the  far  side  of 
Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of the  
Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises  in 
its icy springs.' 
     `Dark is  the water  of  Kheled-zvram,' said Gimli, `and  cold are  the 
springs of Kibil-nvla. My  heart trembles at the thought that I may see them 
soon.' 
     `May you have  joy of the sight, my good  dwarf  l' said  Gandalf.   'But 
whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go down 
the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so  to the Great  River,  and then  
--' 
     He paused. 
     'Yes, and where then?' asked Merry. 
     'To the end of the  journey -- in the  end,' said  Gandalf.  'We cannot 
look too  far ahead. Let us be glad that  the first stage is safely over.  I 
think we  will rest here, not only today but  tonight as  well. There  is  a  

####-wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly 
forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.' 
     'That is true,' said Legolas. `But  the Elves of  this land  were of  a  
race strange to  us  of the  silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not 
now remember them: Only I hear the stones  lament them: deep they delved us, 
fair  they wrought  us,  high they  builded us;  but they are gone. They are 
gone. They sought the Havens long ago.' 
     That morning they lit a fire in a deep  hollow shrouded by great bushes 
of holly, and their supper -breakfast was merrier than it had been since they 
set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for they expected to have all 
the  night  to sleep  in, and they  did not  mean to go  on again until  the 
evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless. After a while 
he left the Company  and  wandered on  to the ridge; there he stood  in  the 
shadow of a tree, looking out southwards and  westwards, with his head posed 
as if he was listening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and look ed 
down at the others laughing and talking. 
     `What  is the  matter, Strider?' Merry called up. 'What are you looking 
for? Do you miss the East Wind?' 
     'No  indeed,' he answered. `But I miss  something. I  have been in  the 
country  of  Hollin in many seasons. No folk  dwell here now, but many other  
creatures live here at  all times, especially birds. Yet now all  things but 
you are silent. I  can feel it.  There is no sound for miles about  us,  and 
your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.' 
     Gandalf looked  up with  sudden interest. `But what do you guess is the 
reason?' he asked.  `Is  there  more  in  it  than  surprise  at seeing four 
hobbits, not to mention  the rest of us, where people are so seldom seen  or  
heard?' 
     `I  hope  that  is  it,'  answered Aragorn.  `But I  have  a  sense  of 
watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.' 
     "Then we  must be more careful,' said Gandalf.  'If you bring a  Ranger  
with you, it  is well  to pay attention to  him, especially if the Ranger is 
Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.' 
     It was Sam's turn that day  to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined 
him. The others  fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even  Sam felt it. 
The breathing  of  the  sleepers could be  plainly heard.  The swish  of the 
pony's tail and the occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam 
could hear his own joints creaking, if  he  stirred. Dead silence was around 

####-him, and  over all  hung a  clear blue sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. 
Away  in the South  a dark patch appeared,  and grew,  and  drove north like 
flying smoke in the wind. 
     `What's  that, Strider? It don't look  like  a  cloud,' said  Sam  in a  
whisper to  Aragorn. He made no  answer, he was gazing  intently at the sky; 
but  before long  Sam could see for himself what was  approaching. Flocks of 
birds, flying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all 
the  land as if they  were searching for  something; and they  were steadily 
drawing nearer. 
     `Lie  flat and still!' hissed  Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the shade 
of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from 
the main host, and came, flying low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought 
they were a kind of crow of large size. As they passed overhead, in so dense 
a throng that their shadow followed them  darkly over the  ground below, one 
harsh croak was heard. 
     Not until they had  dwindled into the distance, north and west, and the 
sky was again  clear  would  Aragorn rise. Then he  sprang  up and  went and 
wakened Gandalf. 
     `Regiments of  black  crows  are  flying over all  the land between the 
Mountains  and the Greyflood,'  he said, `and  they have passed over Hollin.  
They are not natives here; they are crebain  out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do 
not know what they are about: possibly there is some trouble away south from 
which they are  fleeing; but  I  think  they are spying out the land. I have 
also glimpsed many hawks flying high up in the sky. I think we ought to move 
again this  evening.  Hollin is no  longer wholesome  for  us: it  is  being 
watched.' 
     `And in that case so is the Redhorn  Gate,' said Gandalf;  `and how  we 
can get over that withou t being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of 
that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you  
are right.' 
     `Luckily our fire made  little smoke,  and  had  burned  low before the 
crebain  came,' said Aragorn. `It must be put out and not lit again.' 
     `Well if that isn't a plague and a nuisance!' said Pippin. The news: no 
fire, and a move again  by night, had been broken to him, as soon as he woke 
in the late afternoon. 'All because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward 
to a real good meal tonight: something hot.' 
     `Well, you can go on looking forward,' said Gandalf. `There may be many 

####-unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a pipe to smoke in 
comfort,  and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate: 
it will get warmer as we get south.' 
     'Too  warm, I  shouldn't  wonder,'  muttered  Sam  to  Frodo. 'But  I'm 
beginning to think it's time we got  a sight of that Fiery Mountain  and saw 
the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn, 
or  whatever its  name is, might  be it, till Gimli spoke his piece.  A fair 
jaw-cracker dwarf-language  must be!' Maps  conveyed nothing  to Sam's mind, 
and all  distances in  these strange lands  seemed so vast that he was quite 
out of his reckoning. 
     All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds passed over  
now  and  again;  but  as  the  westering  Sun  grew  red  they  disappeared 
southwards. At dusk  the  Company set out, and  turning  now half  east they 
steered their course towards  Caradhras, which far away still glowed faintly 
red  in the last  light of the vanished Sun. One  by one  white stars sprang 
forth as the sky faded. 
     Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo   like the 
remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and  well planned, from 
Hollin to the  mountain -pass.  The  Moon, now  at the  full,  rose  over the 
mountains, and cast a pale light in which the shadows of stones were  black. 
Many  of  them looked  to  have been worked by hands, though  now  they  lay 
tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land. 
     It  was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moon 
was low. Frodo looked  up at the sky. Suddenly  he saw or felt a shadow  pass 
over the high  stars, as  if for a  moment they faded  and  then flashed out 
again. He shivered. 
     `Did you see anything pass over?' he whispered to Gandalf, who was just  
ahead. 
     `No, but I felt it, whatever  it was,' he answered. `It may be nothing, 
only a wisp of thin cloud.' 
     `It was moving fast then,' muttered Aragorn, `and not with the wind.' 
     Nothing  further  happened  that  night.  The next morning  dawned even  
brighter  than  before.  But the air was chill  again; already  the wind was 
turning back towards the east. For two more nights they marched on, climbing 
steadily but ever more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and the 
mountains towered up, nearer and nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose 
before  them, a mighty peak, tipped with  snow  like silver, but with  sheer  

####-naked sides, dull red as if stained with blood. 
     There was a  black look in the sky, and  the sun was wan. The  wind had 
gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and looked ba ck. 
     `Winter deepens behind us,' he said quietly to  Aragorn.  'The  heights 
away  north  are whiter  than  they  were;  snow  is  lying far  down  their 
shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up  towards the Redhorn Gate. 
We  may well be seen  by watchers  on that narrow path,  and waylaid by some 
evil;  but the weather may prove a  more deadly enemy than any. What  do you  
think of your course now, Aragorn?' 
     Frodo overheard  these  words, and understood that  Gandalf and Aragorn 
were  continuing  some  debate  that  had  begun  long before.  He  listened 
anxiously. 
     'I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well, 
Gandalf,' answered Aragorn. `And perils known and unknown will grow as we 
go 
on. But we must  go on; and it is no good our  delaying  the passage  of the 
mountains. Further south  there are no passes, till one comes to the Gap  of 
Rohan.  I do not trust  that way since your news of Saruman. Who knows 
which 
side now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?' 
     'Who knows indeed!' said Gandalf. `But there is another way, and not by  
the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have spoken of.' 
     'But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others I 
beg, not until it is plain tha t there is no other way.' 
     'We must decide before we go further,' answered Gandalf. 
     'Then let us weigh  the matter in our  minds, while the others rest and 
sleep,' said Aragorn. 
     In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast, 
Gandalf and Aragorn  went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Its 
sides  were now dark  and sullen, and  its head  was in  grey  cloud.  Frodo 
watched them, wondering which way the debate would go. When they returned 
to 
the Company Ganda lf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face 
the weather and the high  pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was 
the other dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fill 
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been abandoned. 
     `From signs that we have  seen lately,' said Gandalf,  'I fear that the 

####-Redhorn Gate may be  watched; and also  I have doubts of the weather that is 
coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go  with all the speed that we 
can. 
Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the top of the  
pass.  Dark will come early this evening. We must leave  as  soon as you can 
get ready.' 
     'I will  add a  word of  advice, if I  may,'  said Boromir. 'I was born 
under the shadow of the White Mountains and  know  something of journeys  
in 
the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down 
on the other side. It will not help  us to keep so secret that we are frozen 
to death. When we leave here, where  there are still a few trees and bushes,  
each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.' 
     'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn't  you lad?' said Sam. The pony 
looked at him mournfully. 
     'Very well,' said Gandalf. `But we must not  use the wood -- not unless 
it is a choice between fire and death.' 
     The Company set out again with good speed at first; but soon their  way 
became steep  and  difficult.  The twisting  and climbing road  had  in many  
places almost disappeared, and was  blocked  with  many fallen  stones.  The 
night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A  bitter wind swirled among  the 
rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the knees of the great mountains. The 
narrow path now wound  under a sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which  
the grim flanks of Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right  
was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine. 
     Laboriously they climbed a  sharp slope and halted for a  moment at the 
top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm and saw the dim 
white flakes of snow settling on his sleeve. 
     They went on. But before  long the snow was falling fast,  filling  all 
the air, and swirling into Frodo's eyes. The dark bent shapes of Gandalf and 
Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen. 
     'I don't like this at all,' panted Sam  just behind.  'Snow's all right 
on a fine morning,  but I like to be in  bed while it's falling. I wish this 
lot would  go off to Hobbiton! Folk  might  welcome  it there.' Except on the 
high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire,  and was 
regarded as  a pleasant event and  a chance for fun. No  living hobbit (save 

####-Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 1311, when the white wolves 
invaded 
the Shire over the frozen Brandywine. 
     Gandalf  halted. Snow  was  thick on  his  hood and  shoulders;  it was 
already ankle-deep about his boots.  
     "This is what I feared,' he said. `What do you say now, Aragorn?' 
     'That I feared  it too,' Aragorn answered, `but less than other things. 
I knew the  risk of  snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far south, save 
high up in the mountains. But we are not  high yet;  we are still  far down, 
where the paths are usually open all the winter.' 
     'I wonder if this  is a contrivance  of the Enemy,' said Boromir. "They 
say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that 
stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.' 
     'His arm  has grown long indeed,' said Gimli, `if he can draw snow down 
from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.' 
     'His arm has grown long,' said Gandalf. 
     While  they  were halted,  the wind died  down, and the snow  slackened 
until  it almost ceased. They tramped on again.  But they had not  gone more 
than a  furlong when the storm returned with fresh  fury. The  wind whistled 
and  the snow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromir found it hard to 
keep going. The hobbits, bent nearly double, toiled along behind  the taller 
folk, but it was  plain  that they could not  go much  further,  if the snow 
continued.  Frodo's  feet felt like lead. Pippin  was dragging behind.  Even 
Gimli, as stout as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged. 
     The Company  halted  suddenly, as if  they  had  come  to  an agreement 
without any words  being  spoken. They  heard eerie noises in  the  darkness 
round them.  It may have been only a  trick of  the wind in  the cracks  and 
gullies  of the  rocky wall, but the sounds were those of shrill  cries, and 
wild  howls  of  laughter.  Stones  began  to  fall  from the mountain-side, 
whistling over  their heads, or crashing on the path beside them. Every  now 
and  again they heard a dull  rumble,  as a gr eat  boulder rolled  down from 
hidden heights above. 
     `We cannot go further  tonight,' said Boromir. `Let those  call it  the 
wind who will; there are fell voices on the  air; and these stones are aimed 
at us.' 
     `I do call it the wind,' said Aragor n. `But that does not make what you  
say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the world that have 

####-little  love for those that go on two legs, and  yet are not in  league with 
Sauron, but have purposes of  their own. Some have been in this world longer  
than he.' 
     'Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, `long 
years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands.' 
     `It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off  his attack; 
said Gandalf. 
     'But what can we do?'  cried Pippin miserably. He  was leaning on Merry 
and Frodo, and he was shivering. 
     `Either stop where we are, or  go back,' said Gandalf.  'It is no  good 
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly,  this path leaves the 
cliff  and  runs into  a wide  shallow trough at the bottom of a  long  hard 
slope. We should  have no shelter there  from snow, or stones  -- or anything  
else.' 
     `And it is no good going back while the storm holds,' said Aragorn. `We 
have  pa ssed  no place on the way up that  offered  more  shelter  than this 
cliff-wall we are under now.' 
     `Shelter!' muttered Sam. `If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof 
make a house.' 
     The Company now gathered together  as close to the cliff as  they could. 
It faced  southwards, and near the bottom it leaned  out  a little, so  that 
they hoped it would give  them some protection  from  the northerly wind and 
from the falling  stones. But eddying blasts swirled  round them from  every 
side, and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds. 
     They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony stood 
patiently but dejectedly in  front  of  the  hobbits,  and  screened  them a  
little; but before long the  drifting snow was above his  hocks, and it went 
on mounting. If they had had no  larger companions the  hobbits  would  soon 
have been entirely buried. 
     A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast into a  
warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes,  and out of the 
shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo's voice  speaking.  I 
don't think much of your diary , he  said. Snowstorms on January the twelfth: 
there was no need to come back to report that! 
     But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an effort, when 
he  felt  himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir 
had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow. 

####-     `This will be the death  of the halflings, Gandalf,'  said Boromir. `It 
is useless  to sit  here until the  snow goes  over  our heads.  We must  do 
something to save ourselves.' 
     `Give them this,' said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing out a  
leathern flask. `Just a mouthful each -- for all of us. It is very precious. 
It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our parting. 
Pass it round!' 
     As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant liquor  
he felt a new strength of heart, and the  heavy drowsiness  left  his limbs.  
The  others a lso  revived and found fresh hope and vigour. But the snow  did  
not  relent. It whirled about  them thicker  than  ever, and the  wind  blew 
louder. 
     'What do  you say to fire?' asked Boromir  suddenly. 'The  choice seems 
near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden  from 
all unfriendly eyes when the  snow has covered us,  but that  will not  help 
us.' 
     'You may make a fire,  if you can,' answered Gandalf. 'If there are any 
watchers that can endure this storm, then they  can see us, fire or no.' But 
though they had  brought wood and kindlings by  the  advice  of Boromir,  it  
passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a flame that would hold amid 
the swirling wind or catch  in  the  wet fuel.  At  last reluctantly Gandalf 
himself took a hand. Picking  up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and 
then with a word of command, naur an edraith ammen! he thrust the end of his 
staff into  the midst of it.  At once a great spout  of green and blue flame 
sprang out, and the wood flared and sputtered. 
     `If there  are any  to  see, then I at  least am revealed to  them,' he 
said. 'I have  written Gandalf  is  here  in signs  that all  can  read from 
Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.' 
     But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly  eyes. Their  
hearts were rejoiced to see  the light of the fire. The wood burned merrily; 
and though  all round it  the  snow  hissed, and pools of  slush crept under  
their feet, they warmed  their hands gladly at the  blaze. There they stood,  
stooping  in  a circle round the little  dancing and  blowing flames. A  red 
light was on their tired and anxious faces; behind them the night was like a  
black wall. 
     But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell. 
     The fire burned low. and the last faggot was thrown on. 

####-     The night is getting old,' said Aragorn. "The dawn is not far off.' 
     `If any dawn can pierce these clouds,' said Gimli. 
     Boromir  stepped  out of the  circle and stared up into  the blackness.  
'The snow is growing less,' he said, `and the wind is quieter.' 
     Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes  still  falling out of the dark to be 
revealed white  for a moment in the light of the dying fire;  but for a long 
time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly,  as sleep  was 
beginning to creep over him again, he  was aware that  the  wind had  indeed  
fallen,  and the flakes were  becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly  a  dim 
light began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether. 
     As the   light grew stronger  it showed  a silent shrouded world.  Below 
their refuge  were white  humps and domes and shapeless deeps beneath  which 
the path  that they had trodden was  altogether lost;  but the heights above 
were hidden in great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow.  
     Gimli looked up and shook his head. `Caradhras has not forgiven us.' he 
said.  `He has more snow yet to fling at  us, if we go on.  The sooner we go 
back and down the better.' 
     To this all agreed, but their retreat  was  now difficult. It might well 
prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their fire the snow lay 
many feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in places it  had been 
scooped and piled by the wind into great drifts against the cliff. 
     `If  Gandalf  would go before us with  a bright  flame, he might melt a  
path for you,' said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone 
of the Company remained still light of heart. 
     `If Elves could fly over mountains, they  might fetch  the Sun  to save  
us,' answered Gandalf. `But I must have something to work on.  I cannot burn 
snow.' 
     `Well,' said Boromir, `when heads are  at a  loss bodies must serve, as 
we say in my  country. The strongest of us must seek a  way. See! Though all 
is  now snow-clad,  our path, as  we came up, turned about that shoulder  of 
rock down yonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we 
could  reach that point, maybe it would prove easier  beyond. It  is no more 
than a furlong off, I guess. ' 
     `Then let us force a path thither, you and I!' said Aragorn. 
     Aragorn was the  tallest of the  Company, but  Boromir, little less  in 
height, was  broader and heavier  in  build.  He led  the  way,  and Aragorn 
followed  him.  Slowly  they  moved off, and were soon  toiling heavily.  In 

####-places the snow was breast -high, and often Boromir  seemed to bc swimming 
or 
burrowing with his great arms rather than walking. 
     Legolas watched  them for a while with a smile upon his lips,  and then 
he turned to the others. `The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say: 
let a ploughman plough,  but choose an otter for swimming, and  for  running 
light over grass and leaf or over snow-an Elf.' 
     With that he sprang forth nimbly, and  then Frodo noticed as if for the 
first time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no boots, but wore 
only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made little imprint  in the 
snow. 
     'Farewell!' he said to Gandalf. `I go to find the Sun!' Then swift as a  
runner over  firm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the toiling men,  
with a  wave of his hand he passed them,  and  sped into  the  distance, and 
vanished round the rocky turn. 
     The others  waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragor n 
dwindled into black specks  in the whiteness. At length they too passed from  
sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few flakes of snow 
came curling down again. 
     An hour, maybe,  went by, though it seemed far longer, and then at last 
they  saw  Legolas  coming  back.  At  the  same time  Boromir  and  Aragorn 
reappeared round the bend far behind him and came labouring up the slope. 
     `Well,' cried Legolas as he ran up, `I have not brought the Sun. She is 
walking in the blue fields of the South, and a little wreath of snow on this 
Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have brought back a gleam  of 
good hope for  those who are doomed  to  go on feet. There  is  the greatest  
wind-drift of all just beyond the turn, and there our Strong Men were almost  
buried. They despaired, until I  returned and told them  that the  drift was 
little wider  than  a wall. And on  the  other  side the snow suddenly grows 
less,  while further down  it  is no  more than  a white coverlet  to cool a  
hobbit's toes.' 
     `Ah, it is as I  said,' growled Gimli. 'It was no ordinary storm. It is 
the  ill  will of Caradhras. He  does not love Elves and  Dwarves, and  that 
drift was laid to cut off our escape.' 
     'But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you  have Men with you,' 
said Boromir, who came up at that moment. `And doughty Men too, if I may 
say 

####-it; though lesser  men with spades might have served you  better.  Still, we 
have thrust a lane through the  drift; and for that all here may be grateful 
who cannot run as light as Elves.' 
     `But  how are we  to get down there, even  if  you have cut through the 
drift?' said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.  
     'Have  hope!' said Boromir. 'I am weary, but I still have some strength 
left, and  Aragorn too. We  will  bear the  little folk. The others no doubt 
will make shift  to tread the path behind  us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will 
begin with you.' 
     He lifted  up  the hobbit. 'Cling to  my back! I shall need my arms' he 
said and  strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin marvelled at 
his  strength, seeing the passage that he had already forced with  no  other  
tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the 
track for those who followed, thrusting the snow aside as he went. 
     They  came  at length  to  the  great drift.  It  was  flung across the 
mountain-path like a  sheer  and sudden  wall, and  its  crest, sharp as  if 
shaped with  knives,  reared up more than twice the  height of  Boromir; but 
through the middle  a passage had been  beaten, rising  and falling  like  a  
bridge.  On  the  far  side Merry  and Pippin were set down, and there  they 
waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to arrive. 
     After a  while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in  the narrow but 
now well-trodden track came Gandalf,  leading  Bill with Gimli perched among 
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane; 
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled 
down a fall of stones and slithering  snow. The spray of it half blinded the 
Company as they crouched against the cliff,  and  when the air cleared again 
they saw that the path was blocked behind them. 
     `Enough, enough!' cried Gimli.  'We are departing as quickly as we may!' 
And  indeed with that  last stroke the malice  of  the mountain seemed to be 
expended, as if Caradhras was  satisfied  that the invaders had been  beaten 
off  and  would not  dare to  return. The threat of snow lift ed; the  clouds 
began to break and the light grew broader. 
     As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow  became steadily more 
shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along. Soon 
they  all stood once more on the  flat shelf at the head of the steep  slope 
where they had felt the first flakes of snow the night before. 
     The morning was now far advanced. From  the high place they looked back  

####-westwards over the lower lands.  Far away in the tumble of country  that lay 
at the foot of the  mountain  was  the  dell  from which they had started to 
climb the pass.  
     Frodo's legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and his head 
was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march downhill. Black specks 
swam  before his eyes. He rubbed them, but the black specks remained. In the 
distance below him, but still high above the lower foothills, dark dots were 
circling in the air. 
     `The birds again!' said Aragorn, pointing down. 
     'That cannot be helped  now,' said Gandalf.  `Whether they are good  or  
evil,  or have nothing to do with us at  all, we must go  down at  once. Not 
even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night-fall!' 
     A cold  wind flowed down behind them, as they turned their backs on the 
Redhorn Gate,  and stumbled  wearily down the  slope. Caradhras had defeated 
them. 

####- 
 

Chapter 4. A Journey in the Dark 

 
 
     It was  evening, and the  grey light  was again  waning fast, when they 
halted  for the night. They were very  weary.  The mountains were veiled  in 
deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared them one more 
mouthful 
each of the miruvor  of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he called a  
council.  
     'We cannot, of  course, go on again  tonight,' he said. `The attack   on 
the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a while.' 
     `And then where are we to go? ' asked Frodo. 
     'We still have our journey and our errand before us,' answered Gandalf.  
`We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.' 
     Pippin's  face brightened visibly at the  mere  mention  of  return  to 
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked  up hopefully. But Aragorn  and Boromir 
made 
no sign. Frodo looked troubled.  
     `I wish I was back there,' he said. `But how can I return without shame 
-- unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already defeated? ' 
     `You  are right, Frodo,'  said Gandalf:  `to go back is to admit defeat 
and face worse defeat to come. If we go  back now, then the Ring must remain 
there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell 
will be  besieged,  and after a  brief and bitter time it will be destroyed. 
The  Ringwraiths  are deadly  enemies, but they are only shadows  yet of the 
power and terror they would possess if the Ruling Ring was on their master's 
hand again.' 
     'Then  we must  go on, if there is a way,' said  Frodo with a sigh. Sam 
sank back into gloom. 
     `There is a way that we may attempt,' said Gandalf. `I thought from the 
beginning, when  first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But 
it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before. 
Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had  at least been 
tried.' 
     `If  it  is a worse road  than the  Redhorn Gate,  then it must be evil 

####-indeed,' said Merry. `But you had better tell us about it, and  let  us know 
the worst at once.' 
     'The road  that I speak  of leads to the Mines of Moria,' said Gandalf.  
Only  Gimli lifted  up his head; a smouldering fire  was in his eyes. On all 
the others a dread fell at  the mention of that name. Even to the hobbits it 
was a legend of vague fear: 
     `The road  may lead  to Moria,  but how can  we  hope that it will lead 
through Moria? ' said Aragorn darkly. 
     `It  is a name of ill omen,' said Boromir. `Nor do I see the need to go 
there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we 
come  to the Gap of Rohan, where men  are friendly to  my people, taking the 
road that  I followed on my way  hither. Or we might  pass by  and cross the 
Isen into Langstrand and  Lebennin,  and so come to Gondor from the  regions 
nigh to the sea.' 
     'Things have changed since you came  north, Boromir,' answered Gandalf.  
'Did you not hear what I  told you  of Saruman? With him I may have business 
of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if that 
can by any means be prevented. The Gap of Rohan is closed to  us while we go 
with the Bearer. 
     'As  for the longer road:  we cannot  afford the time. We might spend a  
year in such a journey, and we should pass through many lands that are empty 
and  harbourless.  Yet  they would not  be safe. The watchful  eyes  both of 
Saruman and of the Enemy are on them. When you came north, Boromir, you 
were 
in the  Enemy's eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter  of 
small concern to  him: his  mind was busy with the pursuit of the  Ring. But 
you return now as  a member of the Ring's  Company, and you  are in peril as 
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase  with every league that 
we go south under the naked sky. 
     `Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has become more 
desperate, I  fear. I  see now little  hope, if  we  do not soon vanish from 
sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I advise that we should go 
neither over the mountains, nor round them, but  under them. That  is a road 
at any rate that the Enemy will least expect us to take.' 
     `We do not  know what  he expects,' said  Boromir. `He  may  watch  all 
roads, likely and  unlikely. In  that case to enter  Moria would  be to walk  
into  a  trap, hardly better than knocking at  the  gates of  the Dark Tower  

####-itself. The name of Moria is black.' 
     `You speak  of  what  you do not  know,  when you  liken  Moria to  the 
stronghold of Sauron,' answered Gandalf.  `I alone of you  have ever been in 
the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in  his older and lesser dwelling in  
Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of Barad-dyr do not return. But I wou ld 
not lead you into Moria if there  were no hope of coming out again. If there 
are Orcs there,  it may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs 
of the Misty Mountains were  scattered or  destroyed  in the Battle  of Five 
Armies. The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there 
is a hope that Moria is still free. 
     `There is  even a chance that Dwarves are  there, and that in some deep 
hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However it may prove, 
one must tread the path that need chooses!' 
     'I will tread the  path with you, Gandalf! ' said Gimli. 'I will go and 
look on  the halls of Durin, whatever may  wait  there-if  you can  find the 
doors that are shut.' 
     'Good,  Gimli!  '  said  Gandalf.  `You encourage me. We  will seek the 
hidden  doors together.  And  we will come  through.  In  the  ruins of  the 
Dwarves, a dwarf's head  will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men  or  
Hobbits. Yet it  will not  be the first time  that  I have been to  Moria. I 
sought  there long for Thrbin son of  Thrur  after  he  was  lost.  I passed 
through, and I came out again alive! ' 
     `I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,' said Aragorn quietly; 'but though 
I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish to enter Moria  
a second time.' 
     'And I don't wish to enter it even once,' said Pippin. 
     'Nor me,' muttered Sam. 
     `Of course not!  ' said Gandalf.  'Who would? But  the question is: who 
will follow me, if I lead you there? ' 
     'I will,' said Gimli eagerly. 
     'I  will,' said  Aragorn  heavily.  `You  followed  my  lead almost  to 
disaster in  the  snow, and have said no  word of  blame. I will follow your 
lead  now  -- if this last warning does not move you. It is  not of the Ring, 
nor of  us others that  I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to 
you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware! ' 
     `I  will not go,' said Boromir;  'not  unless  the vote  of  the  whole 
company  is  against me.  What  do  Legolas and  the  little  folk  say? The 

####-Ring-bearer's voice surely should be heard? ' 
     'I do not wish to go to Moria,' said Legolas.  
     The  hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. `I  
do  not wish to go,' he said; `but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of 
Gandalf. I  beg that there should be  no vote,  until we  have slept on  it. 
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this  cold 
gloom. How the wind howls! ' 
     At  these  words  all fell  into silent thought. They  heard  the  wind 
hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and wailing round 
them in the empty spaces of the night. 
     Suddenly  Aragorn leapt to  his feet. 'How the wind howls! '  he cried. 
'It is howling with wolf-voices. The  Wargs have  come west of the Mountains!  
' 
     'Need we wait until morning then? ' said Gandalf. `It is as I said. The 
hunt  is  up! Even if  we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to journey  
south by night with the wild wolves on his trail? ' 
     'How far is Moria? ' asked Boromir. 
     `There was a door south-west  of Caradhras,  some  fifteen miles as the 
crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,' answered Gandalf grimly. 
     'Then let  us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if  we can,'  said 
Boromir. 'The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one fears.' 
     `True!' said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. `But where the 
warg howls, there also the orc prowls.' 
     `I  wish I had taken Elrond's advice,' muttered Pippin to Sam. `I am no 
good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras the Bullroarer  
in  me:  these  howls  freeze my  blood.  I  don't ever  remember feeling so 
wretched.' 
     'My heart's  right  down  in my  toes, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam.  'But  we 
aren't etten yet,  and there are some stout folk here with  us. Whatever may 
be in store for old Gandalf, I'll wager it isn't a wolf's belly.' 
     For their defence in the  night the Company  climbed to the  top of the 
small hill under which they had been sheltering. it was crowned  with a knot  
of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle of boulder stones. 
In the midst of  this they lit a fire,  for there was  no hope that darkness 
and silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs.  
     Round the  fire  they  sat,  and those  that  were  not on  guard dozed 
uneasily.  Poor  Bill the  pony  trembled  and sweated where he  stood.  The  

####-howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer and 
sometimes 
further off.  In the dead  of the night many shining eyes were  seen peering 
over the brow of the  hill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones. At a  
gap  in the circle a great  dark wolf-shape  could be seen halted, gazing at 
them.  A shuddering howl  broke from him, as if he  were a captain summoning 
his pack to the assault. 
     Gandalf stood  up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft. 'Listen, 
Hound of Sauron! ' he cried. `Gandalf is here.  Fly, if you value  your foul 
skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.' 
     The wolf snarled and  sprang towards  them  with a great leap.  At that 
moment  there was a sharp twang. Legolas  had  loosed his bow.  There  was a  
hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to  the ground; the elvish arrow 
had  pierced  its  throat. The  watching  eyes were  suddenly  extinguished. 
Gandalf  and  Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting 
packs had fled. All about them  the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on 
the sighing wind. 
     The  night was  old, and westward the waning moon was setting. gleaming 
fitfully  through the breaking clouds.  Suddenly  Frodo started  from sleep. 
Without warning  a  storm of  howls broke out fierce and wild all  about the 
camp. A great host of Wargs ha d gathered silently and was now attacking them 
from every side at once. 
     `Fling  fuel on the  fire!' cried  Gandalf to  the  hobbits. `Draw your 
blades, and stand back to back!' 
     In the leaping light, as  the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many gr ey 
shapes spring over  the  ring of stones. More and more followed. Through the 
throat of one  huge  leader  Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with  a  
great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood 
with 
his  stout  legs apart,  wielding  his  dwarf-axe.  The  bow of  Legolas was 
singing. 
     In the wavering firelight  Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he rose up, 
a  great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of  stone set 
upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to 
meet the wolves. They gave  back before him. High in  the air he  tossed the 
blazing  brand.  It flared with a  sudden white radiance like lightning; and 
his voice rolled like thunder. 

####-     `Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!' he cried. 
     There was a roar and a crackle, and  the  tree above him  burst  into a  
leaf and bloom of blinding flame. The fire leapt  from tree-top to tree-top. 
The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light. The swords and knives of the 
defenders shone and flickered. The last arrow of Legolas kindled in  the air 
as it flew, and  plunged burning into the  heart of a  great wolf-chieftain. 
All the others fled. 
     Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash  and sparks;  
a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly from the 
hill, as the first  light of dawn came dimly in the  sky. Their enemies were 
routed and did not return. 
     `What did I  tell  you,  Mr. Pippin?  ' said Sam, she/thing his  sword. 
`Wolves won't get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake! Nearly singed 
the hair off my head!' 
     When  the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves were to 
be found, and they  looked in vain for the  bodies of the  dead. No trace of 
the fight remained but the  charred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on 
the hill-top. All were undamaged save one of which only the point was left. 
     `It is as  I feared,'  said Gandalf.  `These  were no  ordinary  wolves 
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!' 
     That day  the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the command  
of some power that had no longer  any use for snow, since they had retreated 
from the pass, a power that wished now to have a clear light in  which things 
that  moved  in the  wild could be  seen from far away.  The  wind  had been 
turning through north to north-west during the night, and now it failed. The 
clouds  vanished southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue.  As  they 
stood upon the hill-side, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over  the 
mountain-tops.  
     `We must reach  the doors before sunset,' said Gandalf,  'or I  fear we 
shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be winding, for  
here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in this country, and only 
once have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago. 
     `There  it lies,' he said,  pointing away south-eastwards to where  the 
mountains' sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet.  In the distance 
could  be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs,  and in their midst, taller than 
the rest, one great grey wall. `When we left the pass I  led you southwards,  
and not  back to  our starting point, as some of you may have noticed. It is 

####-well that I  did so, for now we have several miles less to cross, and  haste 
is needed. Let us go! ' 
     `I do not know which to hope,' said  Boromir grimly: `that Gandalf will 
find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost 
for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall  
the likeliest chance. Lead on!' 
     Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard's side, so eager was he to come to 
Moria. Together they led  the Company back towards the  mountains. The  only 
road of old  to Moria from the  west  had lain along the course of a stream, 
the Sirannon,  that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors 
had stood.  But either Gandalf was astray,  or  else the land had changed in 
recent years; for he  did not strike the stream where he  looked to  find it, 
only a few miles southwards from their start. 
     The morning was  passing towards noon,  and still the  Company wandered 
and scrambled in a barren country  of red stones. Nowhere could they see any 
gleam of  water or hear any sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts 
sank.  They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; but what the 
night  would bring, if it caught them in that  lost land, none of them cared 
to think. 
     Suddenly Gimli, who  had pressed on ahead, called back  to them. He was 
standing  on a knoll and pointing to the  right. Hurrying up they saw  below 
them  a  deep and narrow channel. It was  empty and  silent,  and  hardly  a  
trickle of water flowed among the  brown and red-stained  stones of its bed;  
but  on the  near side there was a path, much broken and decayed, that wound 
its way among the ruined walls and paving -stones of an ancient highroad. 
     'Ah! Here it is at last! ' said Gandalf. `This is where the stream ran: 
Sirannon, the  Gate-stream, they used  to call  it. But what has happened to 
the water,  I cannot guess; it used  to  be swift  and noisy.  Come! We must  
hurry on. We are late.' 
     The Company were  footsore and tired; but they  trudged  doggedly along 
the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned from the noon and 
began  to go west. After  a brief halt  and a hasty meal they went on again. 
Before them the  mountains frowned, but  their path lay in a deep  trough of 
land  and  they  could  see only  the higher shoulders and the  far eastward 
peaks. 
     At length they came  to a sharp  bend. There  the road, which had  been 
veering southwards between the brink of the channel and  a steep fall of the 

####-land to the left, turned and went due east again. Rounding  the corner  they 
saw  before them a  low  cliff, some  five fathoms  high, with a  broken and 
jagged  top. Over  it  a trickling water  dripped, through a wide cleft that 
seemed to have been carved out by a fall that had once been  strong and full.  
     `Indeed things have changed! ' said Gandalf. `But there is no mistaking 
the  place.  There  is  all  that remains of the  Stair Falls. If I remember  
right, there was  a flight of steps cut  in the  rock at their side, but the 
main road  wound away left and climbed with several  loops  up  to the level 
ground at  the top. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right 
up to the Walls of  Moria, and the Sirannon flowed  through it with the road 
beside it. Let us go and see what things are like now! ' 
     They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli sprang swiftly 
up them,  followed by Gandalf and Frodo.  When they reached the top they saw 
that  they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying up of 
the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind  them the sinking Sun filled  the  cool  
western sky with glimmering  gold. Before them stretched a dark still  lake. 
Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had 
been dammed  and had filled  all the valley.  Beyond the  ominous water were 
reared vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in  the fading light: final and 
impassable. No sign of gate or entrance,  not a fissure or crack could Frodo 
see in the frowning stone. 
     `There  are  the  Walls  of  Moria,' said Gandalf,  pointing across the 
water. `And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door at the end 
of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None 
of  the Company, I guess, will wish to swim this  gloomy water at the end  of 
the day. It has an unwholesome look.' 
     `We  must find a way round the northern  edge,' said Gimli. `The  first  
thing for the  Company to  do is to climb up  by the main path and see where 
that  will lead us.  Even  if  there were  no  lake,  we could not  get  our 
baggage-pony up this stair.' 
     `But in any  case we cannot take the poor  beast  into the Mines,' said 
Gandalf. `The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are  places 
narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.' 
     `Poor old Bill! ' said Frodo. `I had not thought of that. And poor Sam!  
I wonder what he will say?  ' 
     `I am sorry,' said Gandalf. `Poor Bill has  been a useful companion and 
it goes  to  my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter  

####-and brought no animal, least of  all  this one that Sam is fond of, if I had 
had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.' 
     The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in the sky 
high above the sunset, when the  Company,  with all  the speed  they  could,  
climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it looked 
to be no  more  than two or three furlongs at the widest point.  How far  it 
stretched  away  southward they could  not see in the failing light; but its 
northern end was no more than half a mile from where they stood, and between 
the  stony ridges  that enclosed the valley and the water's edge there was a  
rim of open ground. They hurried forward, for they had still  a mile  or two 
to go  before they could reach the point on the  far shore that  Gandalf was 
making for; and then he had still to find the doors. 
     When  they came to the northernmost corner of  the  lake  they  found a  
narrow creek that  barred their way. It was green and stagnant,  thrust  out 
like  a  slimy  arm  towards  the  enclosing  hills.  Gimli  strode  forward 
undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at 
the edge. Behind him they walked in file, threading their way with care, for  
under  the  weedy  pools were sliding  and  greasy  stones, and footing  was 
treacherous. Frodo shuddered  with disgust at  the touch of the dark unclean 
water on his feet. 
     As  Sam,  the last of the Company, led Bill up  on to the dry ground on 
the  far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop, as if a  
fish had disturbed the still surface of  the water. Turning quickly they saw 
ripples, black -edged  with shadow in  the  waning  light: great  rings  were 
widening outwards from  a point far out in the lake.  There  was  a bubbling  
noise, and then silence.  The  dusk  deepened, and  the  last gleams of  the 
sunset were veiled in cloud. 
     Gandalf  now  pressed on  at  a great pace, and the  others followed as 
quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry  land between  the lake 
and the cliffs: it  was  narrow,  often  hardly  a  dozen yards  across, and 
encumbered  with fallen  rock  and stones; but they found a way, hugging the 
cliff,  and  keeping  as  far  from the  dark water as  they might.  A  mile 
southwards  along  the shore  they  came upon holly trees.  Stumps  and dead 
boughs were rotting  in the shallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets,  
or of a hedge that had once lined the  road  across the drowned valley.  But 
close under the cliff  there  stood,  still strong and  living,  . two  tall 
trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo  had ever seen or imagined. 

####-Their  great  roots spread  from the  wall to the  water. Under the   looming 
cliffs  they had looked like mere bushes, when seen  far off from the top of 
the Stair; but now they  towered overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing 
deep night-shadows about their feet,  standing  like sentinel pillars at the 
end of the road. 
     `Well, here  we are at last!  ' said  Gandalf. 'Here the Elven-way from 
Hollin ended. Holly  was  the  token  of the  people of that land, and  they 
planted it here to mark the end of their  domain; for the West -door was made 
chiefly for their  use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those  were 
happier days, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of 
different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.' 
     'It was not  the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship  waned,' said 
Gimli. 
     'I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,' said Legolas. 
     'I have heard both,' said Gandalf; 'and I will not give judgement  now. 
But I beg you two, Legolas  and Gimli, at least  to  be friends, and to help 
me. I need you  both.  The  doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find  
them the better. Night is at hand! ' 
     Turning to  the others he said:  'While I  am  searching, will you each 
make ready to enter the  Mines? For here I fear we  must say farewell to our  
good  bea st of burden. You must lay aside much  of the stuff that we brought 
against  bitter weather:  you will  not need it inside, nor, I hope, when we 
come through  and journey on down  into the South.  Instead each of us  must  
take  a  share  of  what  the pony   carried,  especially  the food  and  the 
water -skins.' 
     'But you can't  leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken  place, Mr. 
Gandalf! ' cried Sam,  angry and  distressed.  `I won't have  it, and that's 
flat. After he has come so far and all! ' 
     'I am sorry, Sam,'  said the wizard. `But when the  Door opens I do not 
think  you will  be able  to  drag your Bill  inside, into  the long dark of 
Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.' 
     'He'd  follow Mr. Frodo into  a dragon's  den, if I led him,' protested 
Sam.  `It'd  be nothing short  of murder  to turn  him loose with  all these 
wolves about.' 
     'It will be short of murder, I hope,' said Gandalf. He laid his hand on 
the pony's head, and spoke  in  a  low voice. `Go with  words  of  guard and 
guiding on you,' he said. `You are a wise  beast, and  have  learned much in 

####-Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in 
time to Elrond's house, or wherever you wish to go. 
     `There, Sam! He will have quite as  much chance of escaping wolves  and 
getting home as we have.' 
     Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill, seeming to  
understand well what  was going on, nuzzled up to  him,  putting his nose to 
Sam's  ear. Sam burst into tears, and  fumbled with the straps, unlading all 
the pony's packs and throwing them on the ground. The others  sorted out the 
goods, making a  pile of all that could be left behind,  and dividing up the 
rest. 
     When this was  done  they turned to watch Gandalf. He  appeared to have 
done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall 
of the cliff, as if he  would bore a hole  into it  with his eyes. Gimli was 
wandering about, tapping the stone here  and there with his axe. Legolas was 
pressed against the rock, as if listening. 
     'Well, here  we are and all ready,'  said  Merry;  `but  where  are the 
Doors? I can't see any sign of them.' 
     'Dwarf-doors are  not made to be seen when shut,' said Gimli. `They are 
invisible, and their own  masters cannot  find them or  open them,  if their 
secret is forgotten.' 
     'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,' said 
Gandalf, coming  suddenly to  life and turning  round.  `Unless  things  are 
altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.' 
     He walked forward  to the wall. Right  between the shadow  of the trees 
there  was a smooth space,  and over this he passed  his  hands to and  fro, 
muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back. 
     'Look!' he said. `Can you see anything now?' 
     The Moon  now shone upon the grey face of the  rock; but they could see 
nothing else for a  while.  Then slowly on the surface, where  the  wizard's 
hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins of silver running 
in the stone. At first they were no more than pale gossamer -threads, so fine 
that they only twinkled fitfully where the Moon  caught  them,  but steadily 
they grew broader and clearer, until their design could be guessed. 
 
     At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was  an arch of interlacing 
letters in an Elvish  character. Below,  though  the threads were in  places 
blurred  or  broken,  the  outline could be seen of an  anvil  and  a hammer  

####-surmounted by a crown with seven  stars. Beneath these again were two trees,  
each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than all else there shone forth in 
the middle of the door a single star with many rays.  
     `There are the emblems of Durin!' cried Gimli. 
     `And there is the Tree of the High Elves!' said Legolas.  
     `And the Star of the House of Flanor,' said Gandalf. `They  are wrought 
of  ithildin  that mirrors only starlight  and moonlight, and sleeps until it 
is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is 
long since I heard them, and I thought deeply  before I could recall them to 
my mind.' 
     'What does the writing  say?' asked  Frodo, who was trying  to decipher  
the inscription on the arch. 'I thought I knew the elf-letters but  I cannot 
read these.' 
     `The words are in  the elven-tongue of the West of  Middle-earth in the 
Elder Days,' answered Gandalf.  'But they do not say anything  of importance 
to us.  They say only: The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, and 
enter.  And  underneath  small and faint  is written:  I, Narvi,  made them. 
Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.' 
     `What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?' asked Merry. 
     'That is plain enough,'  said  Gimli. `If  you are a friend,  speak the 
password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.' 
     'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'these doors are probably  governed by words. Some 
dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for  particular persons; and 
some have locks and keys that  are still needed when all necessary times and  
words are known. These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were not 
secret. They usually  stood  open  and doorwards sat here. But  if they were 
shut, any who  knew the opening word could speak it and pass in. At lea st so 
it is recorded, is it not, Gimli? ' 
     'It is,' said the dwarf. `But what the  word  was  is  not  remembered. 
Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.' 
     'But do not you know the word, Gandalf? ' asked Boromir in surprise. 
     `No! ' said the wizard. 
     The others looked  dismayed;  only  Aragorn,  who  knew  Gandalf  well, 
remained silent and unmoved. 
     'Then  what was  the use of bringing us to this  accursed spot?'  cried 
Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at  the dark water. `You  told us that 
you had  once passed  through the  Mines. How  could that be, if you did not 

####-know how to enter? ' 
     `The answer to your first question, Boromir,' said the wizard, `is that 
I do not know the word-yet. But we shall  soon see.  And,' he added,  with  a  
glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, 'you may ask what  is the use 
of my deeds when they are proved useless. As for your other question: do you 
doubt  my  tale? Or have you no wits left? I did  not enter this way. I came 
from the East. 
     `If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors  open  outwards.  
From the inside you may thrust them open with  your  hands. From the outside 
nothing  will move  them  save  the spell of command.  They cannot be forced 
inwards.' 
     `What  are  you going  to do  then? '  asked  Pippin, undaunted  by the 
wizard's bristling brows.  
     `Knock on  the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,' said Gandalf. `But 
if that does not shatter them, and I  am allowed a little peace from foolish 
questions, I will seek for the opening words. 
     `I  once knew every spell in all the tongues  of Elves or  Men  or Orcs 
that was  ever  used for such a purpose. I can still  remember  ten score of 
them  without searching in  my mind. But on ly a few trials, I think, will be 
needed;  and I  shall not  have  to call on  Gimli for  words  of the secret 
dwarf-tongue  that  they  teach to none. The opening words were Elvish, like 
the writing on the arch: that seems certain.' 
     He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff the 
silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil. 
     Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen! 
     Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen! 
     he said  in a commanding voice.  The silver lines faded, but the  blank  
grey stone did not stir. 
     Many times he  repeated these words in different order, or varied them. 
Then  he tried other spells.  one  after another,  speaking  now faster  and 
louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single words of Elvish speech. 
Nothing happened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless stars were 
kindled, the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast. 
     Again Gandalf approached the  wall, and lifting up his arms he spoke in 
tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and struck the rock 
with  his  staff.  Open,  open! he shouted, and followed  it with  the  same 
command  in  every  language that had  ever  been  spoken  in  the  West  of 

####-Middle-earth.  Then he  threw  his  staff  on the  ground, and  sat down  in 
silence. 
     At that moment from far off the  wind bore to their listening ears  the 
howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang to his side 
and whispered softly to him. 
     'Do not let him run away! ' said Boromir. 'It seems that we  shall need 
him still, if the wolves do not  find us. How  I  hate  this foul pool! ' He 
stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the dark water. 
     The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at  the same instant there was 
a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface  out beyond  
where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly towards  the  foot  of the 
cliff. 
     'Why did  you do  that, Boromir? ' said Frodo. `I hate this place, too, 
and I am afraid. I don't know of what: not of wolves, or the dark behind the 
doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool. Don't disturb it! ' 
     'l wish we could get away! ' said Merry. 
     'Why doesn't Gandalf do something quick? ' said Pippin. 
     Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat  with his head bowed,  either in 
despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the wolves was  heard 
again. The ripples  on the water  grew and came  closer;  some were  already  
lapping on the shore. 
     With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang to his feet. 
He was laughing! `I have it! '  he  cried. 'Of  course, of  course! Absurdly 
simple, like most riddles when you see the answer.' 
     Picking up  his  staff he  stood before  the rock and  said  in  a clear 
voice: Mellon! 
     The  star  shone  out briefly  and faded again.  Then silently  a great 
doorway was  outlined, though not a  crack or joint had been visible before. 
Slowly it divided in the middle and swung outwards inch  by inch, until both  
doors lay back against the wall.  Through the opening a shadowy stair  could  
be seen climbing steeply up; but  beyond the  lower  steps the darkness  was 
deeper than the night. The Company stared in wonder. 
     `I was wrong after all,' said  Gandalf, 'and Gimli  too. Merry, of  all 
people, was on  the  right track.  The  opening word  was  inscribed on  the 
archway  all the time!  The translation  should have been:  Say "Friend" and 
enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend and the  doors opened. 
Quite simple. Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days.  

####-Those were happier times. Now let us go!' 
     He strode  forward  and  set his foot  on the lowest  step. But at that 
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize  him by the ankle, 
and he fell with a cry. Bill  the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned 
tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped  after  
him, and  then hearing Frodo's cry  he ran back again, weeping  and cursing.  
The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host  
of snakes were swimming up from the southern end. 
     Out  from  the  water  a  long sinuous  tentacle had  crawled;  it  was 
pale-green  and luminous and wet.  Its fingered end had ho ld of Frodo's foot  
and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it 
with a knife. 
     The arm  let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help. 
Twenty others arms came rippling out. The dark water boiled, and there was a  
hideous stench. 
     `Into  the gateway!  Up  the stairs!  Quick! ' shouted Gandalf  leaping 
back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to 
the ground where they stood, he drove them forward. 
     They were  just in time. Sam and  Frodo were  only  a few steps up, and 
Gandalf had just  begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed  across 
the  narrow  shore  and  fingered  the cliff-wall  and  the  doors. One came 
wriggling over  the  threshold, glistening in  the starlight. Gandalf turned 
and paused. If he  was considering what word would close the gate again from 
within, there  was no  need. Many  coiling  arms seized the  doors on either  
side, and with horrible strength, swung them round.  With a shattering  echo 
they slammed,  and all  light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came 
dully through the ponderous stone. 
     Sam,  clinging  to  Frodo's arm, collapsed  on  a  step  in  the  black  
darkness.  `Poor old  Bill!  ' he said in a choking  voice. `Poor   old Bill! 
Wolves  and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him.  I  had to choose, 
Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.' 
     They heard Gandalf go back down  the steps and thrust his staff against 
the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, .but the 
doors did  not open. `Well, well! ' said the wizard. `The passage is blocked 
behind  us now  and there is only one  way  out--on  the other  side  of the 
mountains. I fear from the sounds that  boulders have been piled up, and the 
trees  uprooted and thrown across the gate. I  am sorry; for the trees  were 

####-beautiful, and had stood so long.' 
     `I felt that  something horrible was near from  the moment that my foot 
first  touched the water,'  said Frodo. 'What  was the  thing, or were there 
many of them? ' 
     'I do not know,' answered Gandalf, 'but the arms were all guided by one 
purpose.  Something has  crept, or has  been driven out of dark waters under  
the mountains.  There  are  older and  fouler things  than  Orcs in the deep 
places of  the world.'  He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever  it 
was  that dwelt  in the lake, it had  seized  on Frodo  first among  all the 
Company. 
     Boromir muttered under  his breath, but the echoing stone magnified the 
sound to a  hoarse  whisper  that all could hear: `In the deep places of the 
world!  And thither we are going against my wish.  Who will lead  us  now in 
this deadly dark? ' 
     'I will,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff!  
' 
     As  the wizard passed  on ahead up  the great steps, he held  his staff 
aloft, and from its tip there came  a faint radiance. The wide  stairway was 
sound and undamaged. Two hundred steps they counted, broad and shallow;  
and 
at the top they found  an arched  passage with  a level floor leading on into 
the dark. 
     `Let us  sit and rest and  have  something to eat, here on the landing, 
since  we can't find a dining-room! ' said  Frodo. He had begun to shake off 
the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt extremely hungry. 
     The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the upper steps,  
dim figures  in the gloom. After they had eaten,  Gandalf gave  them each  a  
third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell. 
     `It will not last much longer, I am  afraid,' he said; 'but I  think we 
need it after that horror at  the gate. And unless we have  great  luck,  we 
shall need all that is left before we see the other side! Go  carefully with 
the water, too!  There are  many streams  and wells in  the Mines,  but they 
should not be touched. We  may  not  have a chance of filling  our skins and 
bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.' 
     'How long is that going to take us? ' asked Frodo. 
     'I  cannot  say,'  answered Gandalf.  'It depends  on many chances. But 
going straight,  without mishap  or  losing our  way, we shall take three or  

####-four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West -door to 
East -gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.' 
     After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager  
to  get the journey over as quickly  as possible, and were willing, tired as 
they  were, to go on  marching  still for  several hours. Gandalf  walked in 
front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light 
of which just showed the ground before  his feet; in his right he  held  his 
sword Glamdring.  Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in  the dim light 
as he turned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf  walked Frodo, and 
he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of  Sting 
or of  Glamdring;  and  that was some comfort, for being the work of  Elvish 
smiths in  the Elder  Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs 
were near  at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after  him  Legolas,  and the 
young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked 
Aragorn. 
     The passage  twisted  round a few  turns, and then began to descend. It 
went steadily down for  a long while before it became level once again.  The  
air grew  hot and  stifling, but  it was  not  foul, and at times they  felt 
currents of cooler air upon  their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings 
in the walls.  There  were  many of  these. In the  pale ray of the wizard's 
staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches and of  other passages and 
tunnels, sloping  up,  or  running steeply down, or opening  blankly dark on 
either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering. 
     Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by h is stout  courage. At least  
he  was not,  as  were most of the  others, troubled by the mere darkness in 
itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where the choice of way was 
doubtful; but it was  always  Gandalf who had the final word. The  Mines  of 
Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination  of Gimli, Gluin's son,  
dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far -off memories of 
a  journey long  before were now of little help, but  even  in the gloom and 
despite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did 
not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards his goal. 
     `Do not be afraid! ' said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than usual, 
and Gandalf and Gimli were  whispering  together; the  others  were  crowded 
behind, waiting anxiously. `Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a  
journey,  if  never on  one so dark; and  there  are tales  of  Rivendell of 
greater  deeds  of his than any that I have seen. He  will  not go astray-if 

####-there is any path to find. He has  led us in here  against our fears, but he 
will lead us out again, at whatever cost to himself. He is  surer of finding 
the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Ber®thiel.' 
     It was well for  the Company that  they  had such  a guide. They had no 
fuel nor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at the doors 
many things had been left behind. But without any light they would soon have 
come  to grief. There  were not only  many roads  to choose from, there were 
also  in many places holes and pitfalls, and dark wells beside  the  path in 
which their passing feet echoed. There were fissures and chasms in the walls 
and floor, and  every  now  and  then  a crack would open right before their 
feet.  The widest was more than seven  feet across, and it  was long  before 
Pippin could summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap.  The noise 
of churning water came  up from  far below, as if  some great mill-wheel was 
turning in the depths.  
     `Rope! ' muttered Sam. `I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it! ' 
     As  these  dangers  became  more frequent  their  march became  slower.  
Already  they  seemed  to  have  been  tramping  on, on,  endlessly  to  the 
mountains' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort 
in  the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo's  spirits had risen  for a while 
after his escape, and  after food and a draught  of the  cordial; but  now a  
deep uneasiness, growing to  dread, crept over him again. Though he had been 
healed  in  Rivendell  of the  knife-stroke,  that grim  wound had  not been 
without effect. His senses were sharper and more aware  of things that could 
not be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed  was that he  could 
see more in the  dark  than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And 
he was  in any case  the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain  against 
his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty of 
evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. He gripped tighter on 
the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly. 
     The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried whispers.  
There  was  no  sound  but  the  sound of  their own feet; the dull stump of 
Gimli's dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the  light step of Legolas; 
the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear  the slow firm 
footfalls of  Aragorn with his  long stride.  When they halted  for a moment 
they  heard nothing  at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and 
drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear, or to imagine  that he heard, 
something else:  like the faint  fall of soft bare feet. It  was  never loud 

####-enough, or near  enough, for him to  feel certain that he heard it; but once 
it had started it never stopped, while  the Company was moving. But  it  was 
not an echo, for when they halted it pattered on for a little all by itself,  
and then grew still. 
     It was after nightfall when they had  entered the  Mines. They had been 
going for several hours with only  brief  halts,  when Gandalf came  to  his 
first serious check.  Before  him stood a wide dark arch  opening into three 
passages: all  led  in  the  same  general  direction,  eastwards;  but  the 
left -hand  passage plunged  down, while the right-hand climbed up,  and  the  
middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very narrow. 
     'I  have no  memory of this  place  at all! '  said  Gandalf,  standing 
uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of finding some 
marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of the kind was 
to be seen. `I am too  weary to decide,'  he said, shaking his head. `And  I 
expect  that you are all as weary  as I  am, or wearier.  We had better halt 
here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever  
dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and  the middle-night has 
passed.' 
     `Poor old Bill! ' said Sam. 'I wonder where he is. I hope  those wolves 
haven't got him yet.' 
     To the  left of  the great arch  they  found a stone door:  it was half 
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed to lie 
a wide chamber cut in the rock. 
     `Steady! Steady!  ' cried  Gandalf as Merry and  Pippin pushed forward, 
glad to find a place where  they could  rest  with  at least more feeling of 
shelter than  in  the open passage. `Steady! You do  not know what is inside  
yet. I will go first.' 
     He went in cautiously, and the others filed behind. `There! '  he said, 
pointing with his staff to the middle of the floor. Before his feet they saw 
a large round hole like the  mouth of a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at 
the edge and trailed down into the black pit. Fragments of stone lay near. 
     'One of you might have fallen in and  still be wondering  when you were 
going to strike the bottom,' said Aragorn to Merry. 'Let  the guide go first  
while you have one.' 
     'This seems  to  have been a guardroom, made for  the  watching  of the 
three passages,'  said Gimli. `That hole was plainly a  well for the guards' 
use, covered with a stone lid. But the  lid is broken, and we  must all take 

####-care in the dark.' 
     Pippin  felt  curiously attracted by  the  well. While the  others were 
unrolling  blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber, as far  
as  possible from the hole in  the floor, he crept  to the  edge  and peered 
over. A chill air seemed to  strike his face,  rising from invisible depths. 
Moved by  a sudden impulse he groped for a loose  stone, and let it drop. He 
felt  his heart beat many times before there was any sound. Then  far below,  
as if  the stone had fallen into deep water in  some cavernous place,  there 
came a plunk, very distant, but magnified and repeated in the hollow shaft. 
     `What's that? ' cried Gandalf.  He was relieved  when  Pippin confessed 
what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see  his  eye glinting.  
'Fool  of a Took!  '  he growled. 'This  is a serious journey,  not a hobbit 
walking-party. Throw yourself in next time, and  then you will be no further  
nuisance. Now be quiet! ' 
     Nothing more was heard for several  minutes; but then there came out of 
the depths faint knocks: tom-tap, tap-tom. They stopped, and when the echoes 
had  died away, they  were repeated:  tap-tom,  tom-tap, tap-tap, tom.  They  
sounded  disquietingly  like signals of  some  sort;  but after a  while the 
knocking died away and was not heard again. 
     'That  was  the  sound of a  hammer, or I have never heard  one,'  said 
Gimli. 
     `Yes,' said  Gandalf, 'and I do not like it. It may  have nothing to do 
with Peregrin's  foolish  stone; but  probably something  has been disturbed 
that would have been better left quiet.  Pray, do nothing of the kind again!  
Let us hope we shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, can 
go on the first watch, as a  reward,' he growled, as he  rolled himself in a  
blanket.  
     Pippin  sat  miserably  by  the door in  the pitch dark; but he kept on 
turning  round, fearing  that some unknown thing would  crawl  up out of the 
well.  He  wished he could cover  the  hole,  if only with a blanket, but he 
dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep. 
     Actually Gandalf was awake, though  lying still and silent. He was deep 
in  thought,  trying  to recall  every memory of  his former journey in  the 
Mines,  and considering  anxiously  the next  course  that he should take; a  
false turn now might be disastrous.  After an hour  he rose up and came over  
to Pippin. 
     `Get into a corner  and have a sleep, my lad,' he said in a kindly tone. 

####-'You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so  I may  as well do the 
watching.' 
     'I know what is the matter with me,' he muttered, as he sat down by the 
door.  'I  need  smoke!  I have not tasted  it since the morning  before the 
snowstorm.' 
     The  last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took  him, was a dark glimpse 
of  the  old  wizard huddled on  the floor,  shielding a glowing chip in his 
gnarled hands  between his knees.  The flicker for  a moment showed his sharp 
nose. and the puff of smoke. 
     It was  Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He  had sat and watched 
all alone for  about six hours, and had let  the others  rest.  `And  in the 
watches I have  made up my mind,' he  said. `I  do  not  like the feel of the 
middle way; and  I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul 
air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right -hand passage. It is 
time we began to climb up again.' 
     For eight dark hours, not counting two brief  halts,  they marched  on;  
and they met no  danger, and heard nothing, and  saw nothing  but the  faint 
gleam  of  the wizard's  light, bobbing like  a will-o'-the-wisp in front of 
them. The passage  they  had  chosen wound steadily upwards. As  far as they 
could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as it rose it grew loftier  
and wider.  There  were  now no openings  to  other galleries or  tunnels on 
either side, and the floor  was level  and sound,  without  pits or  cracks. 
Evidently  they had struck  what once had  been an important road; and  they 
went forward quicker than they had done on their first march. 
     In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in a direct line 
east, though  they must have actually walked twenty miles  or  more. As  the 
road climbed  upwards`  Frodo's spirits rose  a little;  but he  still  felt 
oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the 
Company and beyond the fall and patter of  their feet, a following  footstep 
that was not an echo. 
     They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest, and 
all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly the walls 
to  right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed through some  arched 
doorway into a black and empty space. There  was  a great draught of  warmer  
air behind them, and before  them the darkness was cold on their faces. They 
halted and crowded anxiously together. 
     Gandalf seemed pleased. `I chose the right way,'  he said.  `At  last we 

####-are  coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far now from 
the eastern side. But we are  high up, a good deal higher than  the  Dimrill 
Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide 
hall. I will now risk a little real light.' 
     He  raised his staff,  and for a  brief instant there was blaze  like a  
flash  of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and fled, and for a second they  
saw a vast roof  far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars hewn of 
stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty hall; its black  
walls, polished  and smooth  as  glass, flashed and glittered.  Three  other  
entrances  they saw, dark black  arches: one straight before them eastwards,  
and one on either side. Then the light went out. 
     `That  is all that I shall venture on for the  present,' said  Gandalf. 
'There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out 
to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think we have reached  them 
now, but it is  night outside again, and we  cannot tell until morning. If I 
am right, tomorrow we may  actually see  the morning peeping  in. But in the 
meanwhile we had better go  no further. Let  us rest, if we can. Things have 
gone well  so far, and the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are 
not through yet, and it is a long way down to the  Gates  that open  on  the 
world.' 
     The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled close 
together  in a corner  to escape  the draught:  there seemed  to be a steady 
inflow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about them as  they lay 
hung the darkness,  hollow and  immense,  and  they  were  oppressed by  the 
loneliness and vastness of  the dolven halls and endlessly branching  stairs 
and passages. The wildest imaginings  that dark rumour had ever suggested to 
the hobbits fell altogether short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria. 
     `There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time ' said 
Sam; `and every one  of them busier  than badgers for five  hundred years to 
make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did they do it all for?  They 
didn't live in these darksome holes surely? ' 
     `These are not holes,' said Gimli. `This is the great realm and city of 
the Dwarrowdelf. And  of  old  it was  not  darksome, but  full of light and 
splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.' 
     He rose  and standing in the dark he  began to  chant in a  deep voice, 
while the echoes ran away into the roof.  
     The world was young, the mountains green, 

####-     No stain yet on the Moon was seen, 
     No words were laid on stream or stone 
     When Durin woke and walked alone. 
     He named the nameless hills and dells; 
     He drank from yet untasted wells; 
     He stooped and looked in Mirrormere, 
     And saw a crown of stars appear, 
     As gems upon a silver thread, 
     Above the shadow of his head. 
 
     The world was fair, the mountains tall, 
     In Elder Days before the fall 
     Of mighty kings in Nargothrond 
     And Gondolin, who now beyond 
     The Western Seas have passed away: 
     The world was fair in Durin's Day. 
 
     A king he was on carven throne 
     In many-pillared halls of stone 
     With golden roof and silver floor, 
     And runes of power upon the door. 
     The light of sun and star and moon  
     In shining lamps of crystal hewn  
     Undimmed by cloud or shade of night 
     There shone for ever fair and bright. 
 
     There hammer on the anvil smote, 
     There chisel clove, and graver wrote; 
     There forged was blade, and bound was hilt; 
     The delver mined, the mason built. 
     There beryl, pearl, and opal pale, 
     And metal wrought like fishes' mail, 
     Buckler and corslet, axe and sword, 
     And shining spears were laid in hoard. 
 
     Unwearied then were Durin's folk  
     Beneath the mountains music woke: 

####-     The harpers harped, the minstrels sang, 
     And at the gates the trumpets rang. 
 
     The world is grey, the mountains old, 
     The forge's fire is ashen-cold  
     No harp is wrung, no hammer falls: 
     The darkness dwells in Durin's halls 
     The shadow lies upon his tomb 
     In Moria, in Khazad-dym. 
     But still the sunken stars appear 
     In dark and windless Mirrormere; 
     There lies his crown in water deep, 
     Till Durin wakes again from sleep. 
     `I like  that! ' said Sam. `I  should  like  to learn it. In Moria,  in  
Khazad-dym!  But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking  of all  those  
lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here st ill?  ' 
     Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more. 
     `Piles  of jewels? ' said  Gandalf. `No. The Orcs have often  plundered 
Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves fled, 
no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places: they 
are drowned in water --or in a shadow of fear.' 
     `Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? ' asked Sam. 
     'For mithril,' answered  Gandalf. `The  wealth of Moria was not in gold 
and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such things 
they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did not need to delve 
for  them:  all things that they  desired they could obtain in  traffic. For  
here alone in the world was found Moria -silver, or true-silver as some  have 
called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do 
not tell. Its worth was  ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond price; 
for little is left above  ground, and even the Orcs dare not  delve here for 
it. The lodes lead away  north towards  Caradhras, and down to darkness. The 
Dwarves  tell  no tale;  but  even as  mithril  was the  foundation of their 
wealth, so  also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and  too 
deep,  and disturbed that from which they fled,  Durin's  Bane. Of what they 
brought to light the Orcs  have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute 
to Sauron, who covets it. 
     `Mithril!  All  folk desired it.  It could be  beaten  like copper, and 

####-polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yet 
harder  than tempered steel. Its beauty  was like to  that of common silver, 
but  the  beauty  of mithril  did not tarnish  or grow dim.  The Elves dearly 
loved it, and among many uses they  made of it ithildin , starmoon, which you 
saw  upon  the doors. Bilbo had a  corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave 
him. I wonder what has become of it? Gathering dust  still in Michel Delving 
Mathom-house, I suppose.' 
     `What?  ' cried  Gimli,  startled  out of  his  silence. `A  corslet of 
Moria -silver? That was a kingly gift! ' 
     'Yes,' said  Gandalf. `I never told him, but its worth was greater than 
the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.' 
     Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched the 
rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking 
about with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt 
no doubt that Bilbo knew quite  well.  It was indeed a kingly gift. But  now 
his thoughts  had been carried away  from the dark  Mines, to  Rivendell, to 
Bilbo,  and to Bag  End in  the days while Bilbo was  still there. He wished 
with  all his  heart  that he was back  there, and in those days, mowing the  
lawn, or pottering among the flowers, and that he had never heard  of Moria, 
or mithril --  or the Ring. 
     A deep silence fell.  One by one the others  fell  asleep. Frodo was on 
guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors  out of deep 
places,  dread  came  over him. His hands were cold  and his  brow  damp. He 
listened. All his mind was given to listening and  nothing else for two slow 
hours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo of a footfall. 
     His  watch  was nearly over, when, far  off  where he guessed  that the 
western  archway stood,  he  fancied  that he could  see two pale points  of 
light, almost  like  luminous eyes. He started. His head had nodded. `I must  
have  nearly fallen asleep on guard,' he thought. `I  was on  the edge  of a 
dream.' He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, peering into 
the dark, until he was relieved by Legolas. 
     When he lay down  he quickly went to  sleep, but  it seemed to him that 
the  dream went on: he  heard whispers, and saw the two pale points of light  
approaching, slowly. He woke and  found that the others were speaking softly 
near him, and that a  dim light  was falling on his face. High  up above the 
eastern  archway through a shaft near  the roof came  a long pale gleam; and 
across the hall  through  the  northern  arch light also glimmered faint and 

####-distantly. 
     Frodo sat up. `Good morning!  ' said  Gandalf: `For morning it is again 
at last. I was right,  you see.  We  are high up on the east  side of Moria. 
Before today is over we ought to find the Great  Gates and see the waters of 
Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.' 
     'I shall be glad,' said Gimli. `I have looked on  Moria, and it is very 
great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found no  sign  of my 
kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.' 
     After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at  once. `We 
are tired, but we shall rest better  when we are outside,' he said. `I think  
that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.' 
     `No indeed! '  said Boromir. `Which way shall we take?  Yonder eastward 
arch?  ' 
     'Maybe,' said  Gandalf. `But  I du not know yet exactly  where  we are. 
Unless I am quite astray, I guess that  we are above and to the north of the 
Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. The 
eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but before 
we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that light 
in the north door. If we cou ld find a window it would help,  but I fear that 
the light comes only down deep shafts.' 
     Following  his  lead the Company  passed under the  northern arch. They 
found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the  glimmer grew 
stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway on their right. It was 
high and flat-topped, and the stone door was still upon its hinges, standing 
half open.  Beyond it was a large square  chamber. It was  dimly lit, but to 
their eyes, after so long  a time in the dark, it seemed dazzlingly  bright, 
and they blinked as they entered. 
     Their  feet  disturbed  a deep dust upon the floor,  and stumbled among 
things  lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at first  make out. 
The chamber was lit  by a  wi de shaft high in the  further  eastern wall; it 
slanted  upwards and, far  above,  a small square patch of blue sky could be 
seen. The light of the  shaft fell directly  on a table in the middle of the 
room:  a single  oblong block, about two  feet high,  upon  which was laid a  
great slab of white stone. 
     `It  looks  like  a tomb,' muttered  Frodo,  and  bent forwards with  a  
curious  sense  of foreboding,  to  look more  closely  at it.  Gandalf came 
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven: 

####- 
     'These  are Daeron's Runes,  such as were used  of  old in Moria,' said 
Gandalf. 'Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:  
     balin son of fundin 
     lord of moria.' 
     'He  is  dead then,' said  Frodo. `I feared it was  so.' Gimli cast his 
hood over his face. 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. The Bridge of Khazad-dym 

 
 
     The Company  of the Ring stood silent beside the  tomb of  Balin. Frodo 
thought  of  Bilbo  and his long friendship with the  dwarf,  and of Balin's 
visit to the  Shire long  ago. In  that dusty  chamber  in the mountains  it 
seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world. 
     At length they stirred and looked up, and began  to search for anything 
that would give them tidings of Balin's fate, or show what had become of his 
folk. There was another smaller door on the other side of the chamber, under  
the shaft.  By both the doors they could now see that many bones were lying, 
and among  them  were  broken swords and axe-heads,  and cloven  shields and 
helms. Some of the swords were crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades.  
     There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them were 
large iron-bound chests  of  wood. All had  been  broken and plundered;  but 
beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book. It had been 
slashed  and stabbed and partly burned, and it was so stained with black and 
other  dark  marks like old blood that little of  it could be  read. Gandalf 
lifted it carefully, but the leaves crackled and broke as he laid it  on the 
slab.  He  pored over it  for  some time  without  speaking. Frodo and Gimli 
standing  at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they 
were  written by many different hands, in runes, both of Moria  and of Dale,  
and here and  there in Elvish script. 
     At last Gandalf looked  up. 'It seems to be a record of the fortunes of 
Balin's folk,' he said. `I guess  that it began with their coming to Dimrill 
Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the  pages seem to have numbers referring  to 
the years  after their arrival. The top page is marked  one -- three, so  at 
least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!  
     'We drove out orcs from the great gate and  guard --  I think; the next 
word is blurred and burned; probably room -- we slew many in the bright -- I  
think -- sun in the dale. Flui was killed by  an arrow.  He slew the  great. 
Then there is a blur followed by Flui under grass near Mirror mere. The next 
line or two I cannot  read. Then comes We have taken the twentyfirst hall of 
North end  to  dwell in. There is I cannot read what. A shaft is  mentioned. 
Then Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of Mazarbul. ' 
     'The Chamber of  Records,' said Gimli. `I  guess that is  where we  now 

####-stand.' 
     `Well, I can read no more for a long way,'  said  Gandalf, 'except  the 
word  gold , and Durin's Axe and something  helm. Then  Balin is now  lord of 
Moria . That seems to  end a  chapter. After some  stars another hand begins,  
and I can see we found  truesilver,  and  later the  word wellforged and then  
something, I have it! mithril; and  the last two  lines Uin to  seek for the 
upper  armouries of  Third  Deep,  something go westwards, a blur, to Hollin 
gate .' 
     Gandalf paused and set a few leaves  aside. 'There are several pages of 
the same sort, rather hastily  written and much damaged, he said; `but I can 
make little of  them in  this light.  Now  there must  be a number of leaves 
missing, because they  begin  to  be numbered  five,  the fifth year  of the 
colony,  I suppose. Let  me see! No, they  are too cut and stained; I cannot 
read them. We might do  better  in the sunlight.  Wait! Here is something: a  
large bold hand using an Elvish script.' 
     'That would be Ori's hand,' said Gimli, looking  over the wizard's arm. 
`He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish characters.' 
     `I  fear  he had  ill tidings to record in a  fair hand,' said Gandalf.  
'The first clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless it 
ends in estre. Yes, it  must  be  yestre followed by day being  the tenth of 
novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone  to look in  
Mirror mere.  an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc, hut many 
more  ... up  from  east up  the Silverlode. The remainder of the page is so 
blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think  I can read we have 
barred the gates, and then can  hold them long if , and then perhaps horrible  
and  suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have kept  the  title that he  took for  
less than five years. I wonder  what happened afterwards;  but there  is  no 
time to  puzzle  out the last few pages. Here  is the last page of  all.' He 
paused and sighed. 
     `It  is grim reading,' he said. 'I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We 
cannot get  out.  We cannot get out. They have  taken the  Bridge and second 
hall. Frbr and Luni and  Nbli fell there. Then there are four lines  smeared 
so  that I can only read went 5 days  ago. The last lines run the pool is up 
to  the wall  at Westgate. The Wa tcher in  the Water took Uin. We cannot get 
out. The  end comes, and then  drums, drums in the deep. I wonder what  that 
means. The last thing written is in a  trailing  scrawl of elf-letters: they 
are coming.  There is  nothing more.'  Gandalf paused  and stood  in  silent 

####-thought. 
     A sudden dread and a horror  of  the chamber fell on  the  Company. `We  
cannot get out,' muttered Gimli. 'It was  well for us that the pool had sunk  
a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the southern end.' 
     Gandalf raised  his  head and  looked  round. `They seem to have made a  
last  stand by both doors,'  he  said; 'but there were not many left by that 
time. So ended the  attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The 
time is not come yet. Now,  I fear, we must say  farewell  to  Balin  son of 
Fundin.  Here  he must  lie in the halls of his  fathers.  We will take this 
book,  the Book  of Mazarbul, and look at  it  more  closely  later. You had 
better keep it, Gimli, and take it  back  to Dbin, if  you get a chance.  It 
will interest him, though it will grieve  him deeply. Come, let  us  go! The 
morning is passing.' 
     'Which way shall we go? ' asked Boromir. 
     'Back to the hall,' answered  Gandalf. 'But  our visit to this room has 
not been  in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as Gimli says, the 
Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end. 
Therefore we  should leave by  the  eastern arch of the hall, and bear right 
and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first  Hall should be on the Seventh 
Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall! 
' 
     Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came a great noise: a  
rolling  Boom that seemed  to come  from depths far below, and to tremble in 
the stone at their feet. They sprang towards  the door  in alarm. Doom, doom 
it rolled  again, as  if huge  hands were turning the very caverns  of Moria  
into a vast drum. Then there came an echoing blast: a great  horn  was blown 
in  the hall,  and answering horns  and harsh cries  were heard further off. 
There was a hurrying sound of many feet. 
     `They are coming! ' cried Legolas.  
     'We cannot get out,' said Gimli. 
     `Trapped! ' cried Gandalf. `Why  did I delay? Here we are, caught, just 
as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see what ----' 
     Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook. 
     'Slam the doors and wedge them! ' shouted Aragorn. 'And keep your packs 
on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our way out yet.' 
     `No! ' said Gandalf. 'We must not get shut in. Keep the east door ajar! 
We will go that way, if we get a chance.' 

####-     Another  harsh  horn-call and shrill cries  rang out.  Feet were coming 
down the corridor.  There was a  ring and clatter  as the Company drew their 
swords. Glamdring shone  with a  pale light, and Sting glinted at the edges.  
Boromir set his shoulder against the western door. 
     `Wait a  moment! Do not close it yet! ' said Gandalf. He sprang forward 
to Boromir 's side and drew himself up to his full height. 
     'Who  comes hither  to disturb the rest of  Balin Lord of Moria?  '  he 
cried in a loud voice. 
     There was a  rush of  hoarse laughter, like the fall  of sliding stones 
into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command. Doom, 
boom, 
doom went the drums in the deep. 
     With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before  the narrow opening of the 
door and thrust forward his staff:  There was a dazzling flash that  lit the 
chamber  and the  passage  outside. For an instant  the wizard  looked  out. 
Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back. 
     'There are  Orcs, very many of them,' he said. `And some are  large and 
evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging back, but there 
is something else there. A great  cave-troll,  I  think,  or more than  one. 
There is no hope of escape that way.' 
     'And no hope at all, if they  come at the other  door  as  well,'  said 
Boromir. 
     'There is no sound outside here yet,' said Aragorn, who was standing by 
the eastern door listening. `The passage on  this side plunges straight down 
a stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall. But it  is  no good 
flying blindly  this way with the  pursuit  just behind. We cannot block the 
door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it  opens inwards. We must  
do something to delay the enemy first. We will make them fear the Chamber of 
Mazarbul!' he said grimly feeling the edge of his sword, And®ril. 
     Heavy feet  were  heard in the corridor. Boromir  flung himself against  
the door  and heaved it to; then  he wedged it  with broken sword-blades and 
splinters of wood. The Company retreated  to the other  side of the chamber. 
But they had no chance to fly yet. There was a b low on the door that made it 
quiver;  and then it began  to grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A 
huge  arm and shoulder, with  a  dark skin of  greenish scales,  was  thrust  
through  the  widening  gap.  Then a  great,  flat,  toeless foot was for ced 
through below. There was a dead silence outside. 

####-     Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might; but his 
sword  rang, glanced  aside, and  fell  from his shaken  hand. The blade was 
notched. 
     Suddenly, and to his  own surprise,  Frodo  felt a hot wrath blaze up in 
his heart. `The Shire! ' he cried, and springing beside Boromir, he stooped, 
and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot  
jerked back, nearly  wrenching  Sting from Frodo's arm.  Black dr ops dripped 
from the blade and smoked on the floor. Boromir  hurled  himself against the 
door and slammed it again. 
     `One for the Shire! '  cried  Aragorn. `The hobbit's bite is  deep! You  
have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo! ' 
     There was a crash  on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams  and 
hammers were  beating against it.  It cracked  and staggered  back,  and the 
opening grew  suddenly  wide.  Arrows  came  whistling  in, but  struck  the  
northern wall, and fell harmlessly to the floor . There  was a horn-blast and 
a rush of feet, and orcs one after another leaped into the chamber. 
     How many there were the Company could  not count. The affray was sharp, 
but the orcs were dismayed by the fierceness of  the  defence. Legolas  shot 
two  through the throat.  Gimli hewed the legs from  under another that  had 
sprung up on Balin's  tomb. Boromir and Aragorn slew many. When thirteen 
had 
fallen the rest fled shrieking. leaving the  defenders unharmed, except  for  
Sam who had  a scratch along the scalp.  A  quick duck had saved him; and he 
had  felled  his  orc:  a sturdy  thrust with his  Barrow-blade. A  fire was 
smouldering  in his  brown  eyes  that would  have  made  Ted Sandyman  step 
backwards, if he had seen it. 
     `Now  is  the  time! ' cried  Gandalf.  `Let us  go,  before the  troll 
returns!' 
     But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had reached the 
stair  outside,  a  huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad in black  mail 
from  head  to foot,  leaped  into  the chamber;  behind  him his  followers 
clustered in the doorway. His broad flat  face was swart, his eyes were like 
coals, and  his tongue  was red; he wielded a great  spear. With a thrust of 
his  huge hide shield he  turned  Boromir's  sword  and  bore him backwards,  
throwing him to  the ground. Diving under Aragorn's blow with the speed of a  
striking  snake  he  charged  into  the Company  and  thrust with  his spear 
straight  at  Frodo.  The blow caught  him  on the right side, and Frodo was 

####-hurled  against  the  wall and  pinned.  Sam,  with  a  cry, hacked  at  the 
spear-shaft, and it broke. But  even as the orc flung down the truncheon and  
swept  out his scimitar, And®ril came down upon his helm. There  was a flash 
like flame and the helm burst  asunder.  The orc fell with cloven  head. His 
followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at them. 
     Doom, doom went  the drums  in the  deep.  The  great voice  rolled out 
again. 
     'Now! ' shouted Gandalf. 'Now is the last chance. Run for it! ' 
     Aragorn picked up Frodo  where  he lay by the  wall and  made  for  the 
stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in  front  of him. The others followed;  but 
Gimli had  to be dragged away  by Legolas: in spite of the peril he lingered 
by  Balin's tomb  with his head bowed.  Boromir hauled the eastern  door to,  
grinding upon its hinges: it  had great iron rings on either side, but could 
not be fastened. 
     'I am all right,' gasped Frodo. `I can walk. Put me down! ' 
     Aragorn nearly dropped him in his  amazement. 'I thought you were dead! 
' he cried. 
     'Not yet! '  said Gandalf. 'But there is time  for wonder.  Off you go, 
all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if 
I  do  not come soon, go on!  Go  quickly and choose paths leading right and 
downwards.' 
     'We cannot leave you to hold the door alone! ' said Aragorn. 
     `Do as I say! ' said Gandalf fiercely.  `Swords are no  more use  here. 
Go!' 
     The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped their 
way down  a long  flight  of steps, and then looked back; but they could see 
nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer  of the wizard's staff. He 
seemed  to  be still  standing on guard by  the closed door.  Frodo breathed 
heavily  and  leaned  aga inst Sam, who  put his arms  about him.  They stood 
peering up  the  stairs  into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear  the 
voice of  Gandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with 
a sighing  echo. He could not catch  what was said .  The  walls seemed to be 
trembling.  Every  now and again the drum-beats  throbbed and rolled:  doom, 
doom. 
     Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white  light. Then 
there  was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats broke  out wildly: 

####-doom-boom, doom-boom, and then  stopped. Gandalf came flying down the  
steps 
and fell to the ground in the midst of the Company. 
     `Well, well! That's over!  ' said the wizard struggling to his feet. `I  
have done  all that I  could. But I have met my  match, and have nearly been 
destroyed. But don't stand here! Go  on! You  will have to  do without light 
for a  while: I am rather  shaken. Go on! Go on! Where are  you, Gimli? Come 
ahead with me! Keep close behind, all of you!' 
     They stumbled a fter him  wondering what had happened.  Doom,  doom 
went 
the drum-beats  again: they now sounded muffled and  far away, but they were 
following. There was no  other sound  of pursuit, neither tramp of feet, nor 
any  voice. Gandalf took  no turns, right or left, for the passage seemed to 
be  going in the direction that he desired. Every now and again it descended  
a  flight of steps, fifty or more, to a  lower level. At the moment that was 
their chief danger; for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they 
came on it, and put their feet out into  emptiness.  Gandalf felt the ground 
with his staff like a blind man. 
     At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little more, and 
had descended many flights of stairs. There was still  no sound  of pursuit. 
Almost  they  began to hope that they  would  escape. At the  bottom  of the  
seventh flight Gandalf halted. 
     `It is getting hot! ' he  gasped. `We ought to  be down at least to the 
level of the Gates now.  Soon I think we should look for  a left -hand turn to 
take us  east. I  hope  it is not far. I am very weary. I  must  rest here a  
moment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.' 
     Gimli took  his arm and  helped  him down to a seat on the step.  `What 
happened away up there a t the  door? ' he asked. `Did you meet the beater of 
the drums?  ' 
     'I  do not know,' answered Gandalf. `But I found myself suddenly  faced 
by something  that I have not met before. I could think of nothing to do but 
to try and  put a  shutting-spell on the door. I know many; but to do things 
of that kind rightly requires time,  and even then the door can be broken by 
strength. 
     `As  I stood there  I could hear orc-voices on  the other  side: at any 
moment  I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear  what was said; 
they seemed to be talking in their  own hideous language.  All  I caught was 

####-ghvsh;  that is  "fire". Then something came into the chamber  --  I felt it 
through  the door, and the orcs themselves were  afraid and fell  silent. It 
laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived me and my spell. 
     'What it was  I cannot guess, but I have  never felt such  a challenge. 
The counter -spell was  terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the door  
left  my control and began to open!  I had  to speak a word of Command. That 
proved too great a strain.  The door burst in pieces.  Something  dark  as a  
cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown backwards down 
the stairs. All the wall gave way, and  the roof of  the  chamber as well, I 
think. 
     `I  am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something  else is buried 
there too. I  cannot say. But at least the passage behind  us was completely 
blocked.  Ah! I have never  felt  so spent, but it  is passing. And now what 
about  you, Frodo? There was not time to say  so, but I have never been more 
delighted in my life than when you spoke.  I feared that it was  a brave but 
dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.' 
     `What about me?  ' said  Frodo. 'I am  alive,  and whole I think. I  am 
bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.' 
     `Well,' said Aragorn, `I can only say that hobbits are made of  a stuff 
so tough  that I  have  never met the like of it. Had  I known, I would have 
spoken softer in the  Inn at  Bree! That spear-thrust would have  skewered a  
wild boar! ' 
     'Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad  to say,'  said Frodo; `though I 
feel  as  if I had been caught between  a hammer  and an anvil.' He  said no 
more. He found breathing painful. 
     'You take  after Bilbo,' said  Gandalf.  `There is  more about you than 
meets the  eye, as I said  of  him long ago.'  Frodo wondered  if the remark 
meant more than it said. 
     They  now went  on again. Before long Gimli spoke.  He had keen eyes in 
the dark. `I think,' he said, `that there  is a light  ahead. But it  is not 
daylight. It is red. What can it be? ' 
     `Ghvsh!' muttered  Gandalf. `I wonder if that is what they meant:  that 
the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.' 
     Soon the light became  unmistakable,  and could be  seen by all. It was 
flickering and glowing  on the walls away down the passage before them. They 
could now see their way: in front the road sloped down swiftly, and some way 
ahead there stood  a low archway; through it the glowing light came. The air 

####-became very hot. 
     When they came to the  arch  Gandalf  went through,  signing to them to 
wait.  As  he  stood just beyond the opening they saw his face  lit by a red 
glow. Quickly he stepped back. 
     `There is some new devi lry here,' he said, 'devised for our welcome  no 
doubt.  But I know now  where we are:  we  have reached the First Deep,  the 
level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; and 
the Gates are near: away beyond  the eastern end, on  the left, not more than 
a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge, up a broad stair,  along a wide road 
through the First Hall, and out! But come and look! ' 
     They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was loftier  
and far  longer than the one in which they had  slept. They  were  near  its 
eastern  end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down the  centre stalked a  
double line of towering pillars. They were carved like boles of mighty trees 
whose boughs upheld  the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems 
were smooth and black, but a  red glow was  darkly mirrored  in their sides. 
Right  across the  floor, close  to the feet  of two  huge  pillars  a great 
fissure  had opened. Out of it a fierce  red light came,  and  now and aga in 
flames licked  at the brink and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps 
of dark smoke wavered in the hot air. 
     'If we had come by  the  main road down from the upper halls, we should  
have been trapped here,' said Gandalf.  `Let  us hope that the fire now lies 
between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.' 
     Even as he  spoke they heard again  the pursuing drum-beat: Doom, doom, 
doom.  Away  beyond the  shadows  at the western end of the  hall there came 
cries  and  horn-calls. Doom,  doom:  the pillars seemed  to tremble and the 
flames to quiver. 
     `Now for the  last race! ' said Gandalf. 'If the sun is shining outside 
we may still escape. After me!  ' 
     He  turned left  and  sped  across the smooth  floor of the  hall.  The 
distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the beat and 
echo  of  many  hurrying feet behind.  A shrill  yell went up: they had been 
seen. There was a  ring and clash of steel. An arrow  whistled over  Frodo's 
head. 
     Boromir laughed. `They did not expect this,' he said. `The fire has cut 
them off. We are on the wrong side! ' 
     `Look ahead! ' called Gandalf. `The Bridge is near. It is dangerous and 

####-narrow.' 
     Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the hall the 
floor vanished and fell to an unknown  depth. The outer door  could only  be 
reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the 
chasm with one curving  spring  of fifty feet. It was  an ancient defence of 
the Dwarves against  any enemy that  might  capture  the  First Hall and the 
outer passages. They  could only pass across it in single file. At the brink  
Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind. 
     'Lead  the way,  Gimli! ' he said. 'Pippin and  Merry next. Straight on 
and up the stair beyond the door! ' 
     Arrows  fell  among them. One  struck Frodo  and  sprang  back. Another  
pierced Gandalf's hat  and stuck there  like a black feather.  Frodo  looked 
behind. Beyond  the fire  he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to  be 
hundreds of orcs. They brandished spears and scimitars which  shone  red  as 
blood in the firelight. Doom, doom rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and 
louder, doom, doom. 
     Legolas  turned and set an arrow to the  string, though it  was  a long 
shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow slipped to 
the ground. He  gave a cry of  dismay and  fear.  Two great trolls appeared; 
they bore  great slabs  of stone, and flung  them down to serve as  gangways 
over  the fire.  But  it was not the  trolls that  had filled the  Elf  with 
terror. The  ranks of the orcs had opened, and they crowded away, as if they 
themselves  were afraid.  Something was coming  up behind them.  What it was 
could not be seen:  it was like a grea t shadow, in the middle of which was a  
dark form, of man-shape maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to 
be in it and to go before it. 
     It came to the edge of the fire and the  light faded as if a cloud  had 
bent  over it. Then with  a rush it leaped  across the fissure.  The  flames 
roared up to greet  it, and  wreathed about it; and a black smoke swirled in 
the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand 
was  a  blade like a stabbing tongue of fire;  in its left  it held a whip of 
many thongs. 
     'Ai! ai! ' wailed Legolas. 'A Balrog! A Balrog is come! ' 
     Gimli stared with wide eyes. `Durin's Bane! ' he cried, and letting his 
axe fall he covered his face. 
     'A  Balrog,' muttered  Gandalf.  `Now I  understand.'  He  faltered and 
leaned heavily on his staff. `What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.' 

####-     The dark figure streaming with fire raced towards them. The orcs yelled 
and  poured over the stone gangways.  Then Boromir raised his horn and blew.  
Loud  the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout of many  throats under 
the  cavernous  roof. For a  moment the orcs  quailed  and the  fiery shadow 
halted.  Then the  echoes died as suddenly as  a  flame blown out by a  dark 
wind, and the enemy advanced again. 
     'Over the bridge!' cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. `Fly! This is 
a foe beyond any  of you. I  must hold the narrow  way.  Fly! '  Aragorn and 
Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground, side by side,  
behind Gandalf a t the  far end of the bridge. The others halted  just within 
the doorway  at the hall's end, and turned, unable to leave their  leader to 
face the enemy alone. 
     The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of the span, 
leaning on  the sta ff  in his left hand,  but  in his other  hand  Glamdring 
gleamed,  cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow 
about it reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and the thongs 
whined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. But Gandalf stood firm. 
     `You cannot  pass,' he  said. The  orcs stood still, and a dead silence 
fell. `I  am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. You  
cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Udyn. Go back to  the 
Shadow! You cannot pass.' 
     The  Balrog made  no  answer.  The fire in  it seemed to die,  but  the 
darkness grew. It  stepped forward slowly on to  the bridge, and suddenly it 
drew  itself  up to a  great height, and its wings were spread from wall  to 
wall;  but still Gandalf could  be seen,  glimmering in the gloom; he seemed  
small, and altogether alone: grey  and bent, like a  wizened tree before the 
onset of a storm. 
     From out of the shadow a red sword leaped flaming. 
     Glamdring glittered white in answer. 
     There was a ringing clash and  a stab  of  white fire. The Balrog  fell 
back  and its  sword flew  up in molten  fragments. The wizard swayed on the 
bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still. 
     'You cannot pass! ' he said. 
     With a bound the  Balrog leaped full  upon the bridge. Its whip whirled 
and hissed. 
     'He cannot stand alone! ' cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the 
bridge.  'Elendil!' he shouted. 'I am with you, Gandalf! ' 

####-     `Gondor! ' cried Boromir and leaped after him. 
     At that moment Gandalf  lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote the 
bridge  before  him.  The  staff broke asunder and  fell  from  his  hand. A 
blinding sheet of white  flame sprang  up. The  bridge cracked. Right at the 
Balrog's  feet it broke, and the stone  upon which it stood crashed into the 
gulf,  while the  rest  remained, poised,  quivering  like a tongue  of rock  
thrust out into emptiness.  
     With  a terrible  cry the Balrog fell  forward, and  its shadow plu nged 
down and vanished.  But  even as it  fell it swung  its whip, and the thongs 
lashed and curled  about the wizard's  knees, dragging him to the brink.  He 
staggered  and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid  into the  abyss. 
'Fly, you fools!  ' he cried, and was gone. 
     The fires went  out, and blank darkness  fell. The Company stood rooted 
with  horror staring  into the pit. Even  as Aragorn and Boromir came flying 
back, the rest  of the bridge cracked and  fell.  With a  cry Aragorn roused 
them. 
     'Come!  I  will lead you now!  '  he  called.  'We  must  obey his last  
command. Follow me!  ' 
     They  stumbled  wildly  up the great stairs beyond  the  door.  Aragorn 
leading, Boromir at the  rear. At the top was a  wide echoing passage. Along 
this they  fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that 
he himself was  weeping as  he ran. Doom, doom,  doom the  drum-beats rolled 
behind, mournful now and slow; doom! 
     They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the roof.  
They ran  swifter. They passed into  a  hall, bright with daylight from  its 
high windows in the east. They fled across it. Through its huge broken doors 
they passed,  and  suddenly before  them the Great Gates opened,  an arch of 
blazing ligh t. 
     There  was a guard of  orcs crouching in the  shadows behind the  great 
door posts towering on either  side,  but the gates were shattered and  cast 
down.  Aragorn smote to the ground the  captain that stood  in his path, and 
the rest fled in terror of his wrath. The Company swept  past them  and took  
no  heed  of them.  Out of the Gates they ran and sprang down  the  huge and 
age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria. 
     Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the wind on 
their faces.  
     They did not  halt  until  they were  out  of bowshot from  the  walls.  

####-Dimrill  Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains lay upon it, 
but  eastwards there was a golden  light  on the land.  It was but one  hour 
after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were white and high. 
     They looked  back.  Dark yawned  the  archway  of  the Gates  under the 
mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow drum-beats:  
doom. A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was to be seen; the  dale 
all  around was empty.  Doom. Grief  at last  wholly overcame them, and they 
wept long: some standing and silent, some  cast upon the ground. Doom, doom. 
The drum-beats faded. 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. Lothlurien 

 
 
     'Alas! I  Fear  we cannot  stay here longer,'  said  Aragorn. He looked 
towards the mountains and held up his sword. `Farewell, Gandalf! ' he cried.  
'Did I  not say to you: if  you pass the doors of Moria, beware? Alas that I 
spoke true! What hope have we without you?  ' 
     He turned to the Company. `We must do without hope,' he said. `At least  
we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no more! Come! We 
have 
a long road, and much to do.' 
     They rose and looked about  them. Northward the dale ran up into a glen  
of shadows between  two great arms of the mountains, above which three white 
peaks were shining:  Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras. the Mountains of Moria. 
At the head of  the glen a torrent flowed  like a white lace over an endless 
ladder  of short  falls,  and  a   mist of foam  hung in the  air  about  the 
mountains' feet. 
     `Yonder is the Dimrill  Stair,'  said  Aragorn,  pointing to the falls. 
'Down  the  deep-cloven way that climbs beside  the torrent  we should  have 
come, if fortune had been kinder.' 
     `Or Caradhras less cruel,' said Gimli. `There he stands smiling in  the 
sun! ' He shook his fist at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks and turned 
away. 
     To the east the outflung arm of  the mountains marched to a sudden end, 
and far lands  could be  descried beyond  them, wide and vague. To the south 
the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than 
a  mile away, and a  little below them, for they still stood high up on  the 
west side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a  
great spear-head thrust  deep  into the northern glen; but its  southern end 
was  beyond the  shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet  its  waters were dark: a  
deep blue  like  clear evening sky seen from  a lamp-lit room. Its face  was 
still and unruffled. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all sides 
to its bare unbroken rim. 
     `There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled -zvram! ' said  Gimli sadly.  `I  
remember that he said: "May you have joy of  the sight! But we cannot linger 
there."  Now long shall I journey ere  I have  joy again. It is  I that must 

####-hasten away, and he that must remain.' 
     The  Company now went down  the road from the Gates.  It was  rough and 
broken,  fading to a winding track between heather and whin  that thrust amid 
the cracking stones. But still it could  be seen  that once long ago a great 
paved way  had  wound upwards from  the lowlands of  the  Dwarf-kingdom.  
In 
places there were ruined works of stone beside the path, and mounds of green 
topped with slender birches, or fir-trees sighing in  the wind. An  eastward 
bend led them  hard by the sward of  Mirrormere,  and there not far from the 
roadside stood a single column broken at the top. 
     'That  is Durin's Stone! ' cried Gimli. `I cannot  pass without turning 
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale! ' 
     `Be swift  then! ' said  Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.  `The 
Sun sinks early. The Orcs will  not, maybe, come out till after dusk, but we 
must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost spent, and it will  be 
dark tonight.' 
     'Come with me,  Frodo! ' cried the dwarf,  springing from the  road. `I  
would not have  you  go without  seeing Kheled-zvram.'  He ran down the long 
green slope. Frodo followed slowly,  drawn by the still blue water in  spite 
of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind. 
     Beside  the  standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It  was cracked 
and weather -worn, and the faint runes upon its side could not be read. `This 
pillar marks the spot where Durin first looked  in the Mirrormere,' said the 
dwarf. 'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!' 
     They stooped over the dark water. At first they could see nothing. Then 
slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a profou nd 
blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white flame above them; beyond there 
was a space of sky. There like jewels sunk in the deep shone glinting stars,  
though sunlight was in  the sky above. Of their own stooping forms no shadow 
could be seen. 
     'O Kheled-zvram fair and wonderful! ' said Gimli. `There lies the Crown  
of Durin till he wakes.  Farewell! ' He bowed, and turned away, and hastened 
back up the green-sward to the road again. 
     `What  did  you see?  '  said Pippin to Sam, but  Sam was  too deep  in 
thought to answer. 
     The road now  turned south and went quickly downwards, running out from 
between the arms of  the dale. Some  way  below the mere they came on a deep 

####-well of water, clear as crystal,  from which a freshet fell over a stone lip 
and ran glistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel. 
     'Here is  the spring from  which the Silverlode rises.' said Gimli. `Do 
not drink of it! It is icy cold.' 
     'Soon it becomes a swift river, and  it  gathers water from  many other  
mountain-streams,' said Aragorn.  `Our road leads beside it for  many miles.  
For I  shall take you  by the road that  Gandalf chose, and first I hope  to 
come to  the woods  where  the  Silverlode  flows into the  Great  River -out 
yonder.'  They looked as  he  pointed,  and before  them  they  could see the 
stream  leaping  down to the trough of the  valley, and then  running on and 
away into the lower lands, until it was lost in a golden haze. 
     `There  lie  the  woods of Lothlurien! '  said  Legolas. `That  is  the 
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the trees 
of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not 
till the  spring comes and  the  new green opens  do they fall, and then the 
boughs are  laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the  wood is golden,  
and golden is the  roof, and its  pillars are of silver, for the bark of the 
trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood say. My heart would 
be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime! ' 
     `My heart will be glad, even in the winter,' said Aragorn. 'But it lies 
many miles away. Let us hasten! ' 
     For some  time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with  the  others;  but 
Aragorn was  leading them at  a great  pace,  and  after a while they lagged 
behind.  They  had eaten nothing  since  the  early morning.  Sam's cut  was 
burning like fire, and his head felt light.  In spite of the shining sun the 
wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria.  He shivered. Frodo felt 
every step more painful and he gasped for breath. 
     At last Legolas turned, and seeing  them  now far behind,  he spoke  to 
Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to Boromir to come 
with him. 
     'I am sorry,  Frodo!  ' he cried, full of concern. `So much has happened 
this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were 
hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease 
you, 
as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria were after  us. Come now! A little 
further on there is a place  where we can rest for a little. There I will do 
what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.' 

####-     Soon afterwards they came  upon another stream that ran down  from  the 
west, and joined  its  bubbling water with the hurrying Silverlode. Together  
they plunged over a fall of green-hued  stone, and foamed  down into a dell.  
About  it stood fir-trees, short and bent,  and  its  sides were  steep  and 
clothed with harts-tongue  and shrubs of whortle-berry. At the  bottom there 
was  a level  space  through  which the stream flowed  noisily  over shining 
pebbles. Here they rested.  It was now  nearly three hours  after noon,  and 
they  had  come  only  a few  miles  from  the  Gates. Already  the sun  was 
westering. 
     While Gimli and the two  younger hobbits kindled a  fire of brush-  and 
fir-wood, and drew  water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam's wound was 
not 
deep, but  it looked ugly, and  Aragorn's face  was grave as he examined it. 
After a moment he looked up with relief.  
     'Good luck, Sam! '  he said. 'Many  have received worse  than  this  in 
payment for the slaying of their first orc. The  cut is not poisoned, as the 
wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should  heal well when  I have tended 
it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.' 
     He opened his pouch  and drew out  some withered leaves.  `They are dry 
and some of their virtue has one, he said, but here I have still some of the 
leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weather top. Crush  one in the  water, 
and wash the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn. Frodo! ' 
     'I am all right,'  said Frodo, reluctant  to have his garments touched. 
`AII I needed was some food and a little rest.' 
     `No! ' said Aragorn. `We must have a  look and see what the  hammer and 
the  anvil have  done  to you. I still marvel  that  you are  alive at all.' 
Gently he stripped off Frodo's old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of 
wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered  before his eyes  like 
the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it  off and held it up, and 
the gems on it glittered like stars.  and the sound of the shaken rings  was 
like the tinkle of rain in a pool. 
     `Look, my friends!' he called.  `H ere's a pretty hobbit -skin to wrap an 
elven-princeling in! If it were known that  hobbits had  such hides, all the 
hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.' 
     `And all the arrows of all the hunters  in the world would be in vain,' 
said  Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. `It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I 
have never seen or  heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf 

####-spoke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given! ' 
     `I have  often wondered what you and Bilbo  wer e doing, so close in his 
little room,'  said Merry. 'Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever. 
I hope we get a chance of telling him about it! ' 
     There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo's right side and breast. 
Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings 
had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo's left side also was scored 
and bruised where he had been hurled against the  wall. While the others set  
the  food ready.  Aragorn  bathed the hurts  with wa ter in which athelas was 
steeped. The pungent fragrance filled  the dell, and all  those who  stooped 
over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the 
pain leave him,  and his breath grew  easy: though he was stiff and sore  to 
the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.  
     `The mail is marvellously light,' he said. `Put it on again, if you can 
bear it. My heart is glad  to know that you have  such a coat. Do not lay it 
aside, even  in sleep,  unless fortune brings you where you  are safe for  a  
while; and that will seldom chance while your quest lasts.' 
     When they  had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They  put out the  
fire and hid all  traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they  took  to 
the  road  again.  They  had  not  gone far before the sun  sank  behind the 
westward  heights  and  great  shadows crept down  the mountain-sides.  Dusk  
veiled their  feet,  and  mist  rose in the hollows. Away  in  the east  the 
evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood. Sam and 
Frodo  now  feeling eased  and greatly refreshed were  able  to go at a fair 
pace,  and  with only one brief halt Aragorn  led the Company on  for nearly 
three more hours.  
     It was  dark. Deep  night had fallen. There  were  many clear stars, hut 
the fast -waning moon  would not be seen till late. Gimli  and  Frodo were at 
the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for any sound  upon the 
road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence. 
     'Not a sound but the wind,' he  said. `There are no goblins near, or my 
ears are made of wood. It is to be  hoped that the Orcs will be content with 
driving us from Moria. And maybe that was  all their  purpose, and  they had 
nothing else to do with u s-with the Ring. Though Orcs will often pursue foes 
for many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captain to avenge.' 
     Frodo  did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade  was dull. Yet 
he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon a s the shadows had fallen 

####-about them and the  road behind was dim, he had heard again the quick patter 
of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were two tiny gleams 
of light behind, or for a moment he thought he  saw  them, but at once  they 
slipped aside and vanished. 
     `What is it? ' said the dwarf.  
     `I don't know.' answered Frodo. 'I thought I heard feet,  and I thought 
I saw a light -like  eyes. I  have thought so  often, since we first  entered 
Moria.' 
     Gimli  halted and  stooped  to  the  ground. 'I  hear  nothing but  the 
night-speech of plant  and stone,'  he said. 'Come! Let us hurry! The others 
are out of sight.' 
     The  night-wind  blew  chill up the valley to  meet them. Before them a  
wide  grey shadow loomed, and  they heard an endless  rustle of leaves  like 
poplars in the breeze. 
     `Lothlurien! ' cried Legolas. 'Lothlurien! We have come to the eaves of 
the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter! ' 
     Under  the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the road 
and stream that  ran suddenly  beneath their  spreading  boughs. In  the dim 
light of  the stars their stems were grey, and their quivering leaves a hint 
of fallow gold. 
     'Lothlurien! '  said  Aragorn. 'Glad I am to hear again the wind in the 
trees! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates, but we can 
go no further. Here  let  us hope that the virtue of the Elves will  keep us 
tonight from the peril that comes behind.' 
     `If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,' said Gimli. 
     'It is long since any  of my own folk journeyed hither back to the land 
whence we wandered in ages long ago,' said Legolas, 'but we hear that Lurien 
is not yet deserted, for there is a  secret power here  that holds evil from 
the land.  Nevertheless its folk are seldom  seen, and maybe they  dwell now  
deep in the woods and far from the northern border.' 
     'Indeed deep  in the  wood they dwell,' said Aragorn, and sighed as  if 
some memory stirred in him. `We must fend for ourselves tonight.  We will go 
forward a short way, until the trees are all about us, and then we will turn 
aside from the path and seek a place to rest in.' 
     He stepped forward; but Boromir  stood irresolute and did  not  follow.  
'Is there no other way?  ' he said. 
     `What other fairer way would you desire? ' said Aragorn. 

####-     `A plain road, though it  led through a hedge of swords,' said Boromir. 
`By  strange  paths has this Company been  led, and so far  to evil fortune. 
Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we 
must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heard 
in  Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few  
none have escaped unscathed.' 
     `Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe you will speak 
the truth said Aragorn. But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of 
those who once were wise they now speak evil of Lothlurien. Believe what you  
will,  there  is no other  way  for  us  --  unless  you  would  go  back  to 
Moria -gate, or  scale the pathless mountains, or swim the  Great  River  all 
alone.' 
     `Then lead on! ' said Boromir. `But it is perilous.' 
     `Perilous indeed,' said Aragorn, 'fair and perilous; but only evil need 
fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me!  ' 
     They  had gone  little more than a mile into the  forest when they came 
upon  another  stream flowing  down swiftly from  the tree-clad  slopes that 
climbed back westward towards the mountains.  They heard it splashing over a  
fall away among the shadows on  their  right. Its dark  hurrying waters  ran 
across the path before  them, and joined  the Silverlode in a  swirl  of dim 
pools among the roots of trees.  
     `Here is Nimrodel! ' said  Legolas.  'Of this stream  the Silvan  Elves 
made  many songs long ago, and still we sing them  in the North, remembering 
the rainbow on its falls, and the  golden flowers  that floated in its foam. 
All is  dark now  and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my 
feet, for it  is said that  the water is  healing to  the  weary.'  He  went 
forward and climbed down the deep-cloven bank and stepped into the stream. 
     `Follow me!' he  cried. 'The water is not deep. Let us wade  across! On 
the  further bank we can rest. and  the sound of the falling water may bring 
us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.' 
     One by one they  climbed down and followed Legolas. For  a moment Frodo 
stood near the brink and let the water flow over his tired feet. It was cold 
but its touch was clean, and  as he went on and it  mounted to his knees, he 
felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs.  
     When all  the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a little 
food; and Legolas  told them  tales of Lothlurien that the Elves of Mirkwood  
still  kept  in their  hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon the meadows by 

####-the Great River before the world was grey. 
     At  length  a  silence fell, and they  heard the music of the waterfall 
running sweetly  in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he  could  hear a 
voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water. 
     `Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel? ' asked Legolas. 'I will sing you a  
song  of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same  name  as the stream  besi de 
which she lived lung ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this 
is how it runs in the  Westron Speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.' In 
a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above them  he 
began: 
     An Elven-maid there was of old, 
     A shining star by day: 
     Her mantle white was hemmed with gold, 
     Her shoes of silver-grey. 
 
     A star was bound upon her brows, 
     A light was on her hair 
     As sun upon the golden boughs 
     In Lurien the fair. 
 
     Her hair was long, her limbs were white, 
     And fair she was and free; 
     And in the wind she went as light 
     As leaf of linden-tree. 
 
     Beside the falls of Nimrodel, 
     By water clear and cool, 
     Her voice as falling silver fell 
     Into the shining pool. 
 
     Where now she wanders none can tell, 
     In sunlight or in shade; 
     For lost of yore was Nimrodel 
     And in the mountains strayed. 
 
     The elven-ship in haven grey 
     Beneath the mountain -lee 

####-     Awaited her for many a day 
     Beside the roaring sea. 
 
     A wind by night in Northern lands 
     Arose, and loud it cried, 
     And drove the ship from elven-strands 
     Across the streaming tide. 
 
     When dawn came dim the land was lost, 
     The mountains sinking grey 
     Beyond the heaving waves that tossed 
     Their plumes of blinding spray. 
 
     Amroth beheld the fading shore 
     Now low beyond the swell, 
     And cursed the faithless ship that bore 
     Him far from Nimrodel. 
 
     Of old he was an Elven-king, 
     A lord of tree and glen, 
     When golden were the boughs in spring 
     In fair Lothlurien. 
 
     From helm to sea they saw him leap, 
     As arrow from the string, 
     And dive into the water deep, 
     As mew upon the wing. 
 
     The wind was in his flowing hair, 
     The foam about him shone; 
     Afar they saw him strong and fair 
     Go riding like a swan. 
 
     But from the West has come no word, 
     And on the Hither Shore 
     No tidings Elven-folk have heard 
     Of Amroth evermore. 

####-     The voice of Legolas faltered, and the  song ceased. 'I cannot sing any 
more,' he said. 'That is  but a part, for I have forgotten much.  It is long 
and  sad,  for  it  tells  how sorrow came  upon Lothlurien,  Lurien  of the 
Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened  evil in the mountains.' 
     `But the Dwarves did not make the evil,' said Gimli. 
     `I said not  so; yet evil came,' answered Legolas sadly.  `Then many of 
the Elves  of  Nimrodel's kindred left their dwellings and departed  and she 
was  lost far in  the South, in  the passes of the White Mountains;  and she 
came  not to  the ship where  Amroth her  lover waited for  her. But  in the 
spring when the wind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still be  
heard by the falls that bear her name. And when the wind is in the South the 
voice  of Amroth comes up from the sea; for  Nimrodel flows into Silverlode, 
that Elves call Celebrant, and Celebrant into Anduin  the Great. and  Anduin 
flows into  the  Bay of Belfalas  whence the  Elves of Lurien set  sa il. But 
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth ever came back. 
     'It is told  that she had a house built in the branches  of a tree that 
grew  near the falls; for that  was the custom  of the  Elves of  Lurien, to 
dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Ther efore they were called the 
Galadhrim, the Tree-people. Deep  in  their forest the trees are very great. 
The people of the woods did not delve in the  ground like Dwarves, nor build 
strong places of stone before the Shadow came.' 
     `And even in  these la tter days dwelling in the trees might  be thought 
safer than sitting on the  ground,' said  Gimli. He looked across the stream 
to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then up into the roof of dark 
boughs above. 
     `Your  words bring good counsel, Gimli,' said Aragorn. `We cannot build 
a house, but  tonight we  will do as the Galadhrim  and seek  refuge  in the 
tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside  the road  already longer than 
was wise.' 
     The Company now turned aside from the path, and  went into the shadow of 
the deeper woods,  westward along  the mountain-stream away from 
Silverlode. 
Not  far from the falls of Nimrodel they  found a cluster of trees,  some of 
which overhung the stream. Their great grey trunks were of mighty girth, but 
their height could not be guessed. 
     `I will climb up,' said  Legolas. `I am at home among trees, by root or  
bough, though  these  trees are of a kind strange to  me, save as  a name in 

####-song.  Mellyrn  they are called, and are those that bear the yellow blossom, 
but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is  their shape and way 
of growth.' 
     `Whatever  it may be,'  said Pippin,  `they  will be  marvellous  trees 
indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot  sleep 
on a perch! ' 
     'Then dig a hole in the  ground,' said Legolas, `if that  is more after 
the fashion of your kind. But  you  must dig swift and deep, if you  wish to 
hide from Orcs.' He sprang  lightly up from the ground  and  caught a branch 
that grew from the trunk high above his head. But even as he swung there for 
a moment, a voice spoke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him. 
     `Daro!'  it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to  earth 
in surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree. 
     'Stand still! ' he whispered to the others. `Do not move or speak! ' 
     There  was a sound  of soft laughter over their heads, and then another  
clear voice spoke in an  elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of what 
was  said, for the speech that the  Silvan folk east of the  mountains  used 
among themselves was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and 
answered 
in the same language.* 
     `Who are they, and what do they say? ' asked Merry. 
     `They're Elves,' said Sam. `Can't  you hear their voices? ' 
     `Yes, they are Elves,'  said Legolas; `and they say that you breathe so 
loud that they could  shoot you in the dark.' Sam  hastily put his hand over 
his mouth.  'But they say also that  you need have  no fear. They have  been 
aware of us for a long while. They heard  my  voice across the Nimrodel, and 
knew that I  was one of their  Northern kindred, and therefore they did  not 
hinder our  crossing; and  afterwards  they  heard  my song. Now they bid me 
climb up  with Frodo;  for they seem  to have had some tidings of him and of 
our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep  watch at  the 
foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.' 
     Out of  the  shadows a  ladder  was  let  down:  it  was made  of rope, 
silver -grey and  glimmering  in the dark, and  though it looked  slender  it 
proved  strong enough to bear  many men. Legolas ran  lightly up, and  Frodo 
followed slowly; behind  came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches 
of the mallorn-tree grew  out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swept 
upward; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown  of many boughs,  

####-and  among these they  found that there had been built a wooden platform, or 
flet as such things were called in those days: the  Elves called it a talan. 
It  was  reached  by a round hole in  the  centre  through  which the ladder  
passed. 
     When Frodo came at last up on to the flet he found Legolas seated  with 
three other Elves. They were clad  in  shadowy-grey, and could  not  be seen 
among  the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of 
them uncovered a small lamp that  gave out a slender silver beam. He held it 
up,  looking at Frodo's face,  and Sam's. Then he shut  off the light again, 
and  spoke words of welcome in  his elven-tongue.  Frodo  spoke haltingly in 
return. 
     `Welcome!' the Elf then said  again in the  Common  Language,  speaking 
slowly. 'We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we dwell now in the heart 
of the forest, and do not willingly have dealings  with any other folk. Even 
our own kindred in the North are sundered from us. But there  are some of us 
still  who  go  abroad  for  the gathering  of news and the watching  of our 
enemies, and they speak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my  
name. My brothers, R®mil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue. 
     `But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers of Elrond 
passed by Lurien on their way home up the Dimrill Stair. We had not heard of 
hobbits, or halflings, for many a long year,  and did not know  that any yet 
dwelt in Middle-earth. You do not  look evil! And since you come with an Elf 
of our  kindred, we are willing to befriend you, as  Elrond asked; though it 
is not our custom to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here 
tonight. How many are you? ' 
     `Eight,' said Legolas. `Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom, 
Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.' 
     `The  name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lurien,' said Haldir, 
`and  he  has the favour of  the  Lady. All then is  well.  But you have yet 
spoken only of seven.' 
     `The eighth is a dwarf,' said Legolas. 
     `A dwarf! '  said Haldir. `That  is not well. We have not had  dealings 
wi th  the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in our land. I  
cannot allow him to pass.' 
     `But  he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of  Dbin's trusty people, and 
friendly to Elrond,' said Frodo. `Elrond himself  chose him to be one of our 
companions, and he has been brave and faithful.' 

####-     The  Elves  spoke together in  soft  voices, and questioned Legolas  in 
their own tongue. 'Very good,' said Haldir at last. `We will do this, though 
it is against our liking. If  Aragorn and Legolas will guard him, and answer  
for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlurien. 
     `But now  we must debate  no  longer. Your folk  must not remain on the 
ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a  great 
troop of Orcs  going north toward Moria, along  the skirts of the mountains,  
many days ago. Wolves  are howling on the wood's borders. If you have indeed 
come from Moria, the peril cannot  be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go 
on. 
     'The four hobbits shall c limb up here  and  stay with us-we do not fear 
them! There is  another talan in  the next tree.  There the others must take 
refuge.  You, Legolas, must answer to us for them. Call  us, if  anything is 
amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf!' 
     Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soon  
afterwards Merry and Pippin  clambered up on to the high flet. They were out 
of breath and seemed rather scared. 
     `There!' said Merry  panting. `We  have lugged up your blankets as well 
as  our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of  the baggage in a deep drift 
of leaves.' 
     `You had no  need  of your burdens,' said  Haldir. `It is  cold in  the 
tree-tops in  winter, though the wind tonight is  in the  South; but we have 
food and drink to give you that will drive away the night -chill, and we have 
skins and cloaks to spare.' 
     The  hobbits accepted this  second (and far better) supper very gladly. 
Then they  wrapped themselves warmly,  not only  in  the fur-cloaks  of  the 
Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and  tried  to  go  to  sleep. But 
weary  as  they  were only  Sam found that  easy to  do. Hobbits do not like 
heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The flet 
was not at  all to their liking as a  bedroom.  It had  no walls. not even a  
rail; only on one side  was there a  light  plaited  screen,  which could be 
moved and fixed in different places according to the wind. 
     Pippin went on  talking for a while. `I  hope, if I  do  go to sleep in 
this bed-loft, that I shan't roll off,' he said. 
     `Once I do get to sleep,' said Sam, 'i  shall go on sleeping, whether I 
roll off or no. And the less said,  the sooner I'll drop off, if you take my 
meaning.' 

####-     Frodo  lay  for some  time awake,  and looked up  at the stars glinting 
through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his  side long 
before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see  the grey forms of two  
elves  sitting motionless  with their  arms about  their  knees, speaking in 
whispers. The other had  gone down to take up  his watch on one of the lower  
branches. At  last lulled by the wind in the  boughs above,  and  the  sweet 
murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below,  Frodo  fell  asleep with the song of 
Legolas running in his mind. 
     Late in the  night he awoke. The  other hobbits were  asleep. The Elves 
were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the leaves. The wind 
was 
still. A little way off he heard a harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on 
the ground below. There was a ring of  metal. The sounds died  slowly  away, 
and seemed to go southward, on into the wood. 
     A head  appeared suddenly through the hole in the flet. Frodo sat up in  
alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards the hobbits. 
     `What is it? ' said Frodo. 
     `Yrch!' said  the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the flet the 
rope-ladder rolled up. 
     'Orcs! ' said Frodo. `What are they doing? ' But the Elf had gone. 
     There were  no more  sounds. Even the leaves were silent,  and the very 
falls  seemed  to  be hushed.  Frodo sat and  shivered in his wraps. He  was 
thankful that they had not been  caught on the ground; but he felt  that the 
trees offered little  protection, except concealment.  Orcs were  as keen as 
hounds on  a scent, it  was  said, but they could  also climb.  He drew  out 
Sting: it flashed and glittered  like a  blue  flame  and then  slowly faded 
again and grew dull. In  spite  of the  fading of his  sword  the feeling of 
immediate danger did no t leave Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and 
crawled to the opening and peered  down. He was almost certain that he could 
hear stealthy movements at the tree's foot far below. 
     Not Elves; for  the  woodland folk were  altogether noiseless in  their 
movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like sniffing: and something seemed 
to  be  scrabbling on the bark of  the tree-trunk. He  stared down into  the 
dark, holding his breath. 
     Something was now  climbing slowly, and  its breath  came  like a   soft 
hissing through closed teeth. Then coming  up, close  to the stem, Frodo saw 

####-two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they 
turned 
away, and a shadowy figure slipped round the trunk of the tree and vanished. 
     Immediately  afterwards Haldir  came  climbing swiftly  up through  the 
branches. `There was something in this tree that I have never seen  before,' 
he said. `It was not an orc. It fled as  soon as I touched the tree-stem. It 
seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees, or I  might have thought  
that it was one of you hobbits.  
     'I did not  shoot, for I  dared not arouse any  cries:  we cannot  risk  
battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They crossed the Nimrodel-curse 
their foul feet in its clean water!-and went on down the old road beside the 
river. They seemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the ground for a 
while near the place where you halted. The three of us could not challenge a  
hundred,  so we went ahead and spoke  with feigned  voices, leading  them on 
into the wood. 
     `Orophin  has  now  gone in haste  back  to our  dwellings  to warn our 
people. None of the Orcs will  ever return out of  Lurien. And there will be 
many Elves hidden on the northern border before another night falls. Bu t you 
must take the road south as soon as it is fully light.' 
     Day came pale from the East. As the light grew  it filtered through the 
yellow leaves of  the mallorn, and  it  seemed to the hobbits that the early 
sun of a  cool summer's morning was  shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the 
moving branches. Looking  through an opening on the south side  of the  flet  
Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying  like a  sea of fallow gold 
tossing gently in the breeze. 
     The  morning was  still  young and cold when the Company set out again, 
guided now  by Haldir and his  brother  R®mil. `Farewell,  sweet Nimrodel! ' 
cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and  caught a gleam of white foam among 
the 
grey tree-stems.  `Farewell,' he said. It seemed to him  tha t he would never  
hear again  a running water so beautiful, for  ever blending its innumerable 
notes in an endless changeful music. 
     They went back to the path that  still  went on along the west side  of 
the  Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There were the 
prints of orc-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees 
and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows. 
     `There is one of my  people yonder across the stream,' he said  `though 

####-you may not see him.' He gave a call like the low whistle of a bird, and out 
of a thicket of  young trees an Elf stepped, clad in grey, but with his hood 
thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skilfully 
cast over the stream a coil of grey rope, and he caught it and bound the end 
about a tree near the bank. 
     `Celebrant is  already  a  strong stream here, as you see,' said Haldir 
'and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We do not set foot in it 
so far  north, unless  we must. But  in these days of watchfulness we do not 
make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!' He  made his end of the rope 
fast about another tree,  and then ran lightly along it, over the  river and 
back again, as if he were on a road. 
     `I  can walk  this path,' said  Legolas; `but the others have not  this 
skill. Must they swim?' 
     `No!' said Haldir. `We have two  more ropes. We  will fasten them above 
the other, one shoulder-high,  and another half-high, and holding these  the 
strangers should be able to cross with care.' 
     When this  slender bridge had been made, the Company passed  over, some 
cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of  the hobbits Pippin proved the 
best for he was  sure-footed, and he walked  over quickly, holding only with 
one hand;  but he kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. Sam 
shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water 
as if it was a chasm in the mountains.  
     He breathed with relief when he was safely across. `Live and  learn! as 
my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening,  not of roosting 
like a bird,  nor  of trying  to walk like a spider. Not even my  uncle Andy 
ever did a trick like that! ' 
     When  at length  all the Company was gathered on the  east  bank of the 
Silverlode,  the Elves untied the ropes and  coiled two of them.  R®mil, who 
had remained  on  the  other side, drew back the last  one, slung  it on his 
shoulder, and  with a wave of his hand went away,  back to  Nimrodel to keep 
watch. 
     `Now, friends,'  said  Haldir, `you have entered the Naith of Lurien or  
the  Gore, as you would  say, for it is the land that lies like a spear -head 
between the arms of Silverlode  and Anduin the Great. We  allow no strangers 
to spy  out the secrets of the  Naith. Few indeed  are permitted even to set 
foot there. 
     `As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf. The 

####-other may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our dwellings, down 
in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters. ' 
     This was not at  all to the liking of  Gimli.  `The  agreement was made 
without my consent,' he said. `I will not walk blindfold, like a beggar or a  
prisoner. And I am no spy.  My folk  have never had dealings with any of the 
servants of the Enemy. Neither have we  done harm to the Elves. I am no more 
likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.' 
     'I  do not doubt you,' said Haldir. 'Yet this is our law. I am  not the 
master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I  have done much in letting you  
set foot over Celebrant.' 
     Gimli was  obstinate. He  planted his feet  firmly apart, and laid  his 
hand upon the haft of his axe. 'I will go forward free,' he said, 'or I will 
go back and seek my own land,  where I am known to be true of word, though I 
perish alone in the wilderness.' 
     `You cannot go back,' said Haldir sternly. 'Now you have come thus far, 
you must be  brought before the Lord and the Lady. They shall judge  you, to 
hold  you or to  give you leave, as they  will. You cannot cross the  rivers 
again, and behind you  there are now secret sentinels  that you cannot pass.  
You would be slain before you saw them.' 
     Gimli  drew  his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion bent their 
bows. 'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! ' said Legolas.  
     'Come!'  said Aragorn. `If I am still to lead this Company, you must do 
as I bid. It is hard upon  the Dwarf to be thus singled  out. We will all be 
blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it will make  the journey 
slow and dull.' 
     Gimli laughed  suddenly. `A  merry  troop of fools we  shall look! Will 
Haldir lead us all on a string, like  many blind beggars with one dog? But I 
will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.' 
     `I am an Elf and a  kinsman here,' said Legolas, becoming angry  in his 
turn. 
     `Now let us cry: "a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!"' said Aragorn. 
`But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes Haldir! ' 
     `I shall claim  full amends for every fall and  stubbed  toe, if you do 
not lead us well,' said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.  
     'You will have no claim,' said  Haldir. `I shall lead you well, and the 
paths are smooth and straight.' 
     `Alas for  the  folly  of these  days! '  said Legolas.  'Here  all  are 

####-enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must  walk blind, while the sun is merry 
in the woodland under leaves of gold!  ' 
     `Folly it  may seem,' said Haldir. 'Indeed  in nothing is the power  of 
the Dark Lord more clearly shown  than in the estrangement that  divides all  
those who still oppose him.  Yet so little faith and trust do we find now in 
the world beyond Lothlurien, unless maybe in  Rivendell, that we dare not by 
our own  trust  endanger our  land. We live  now  upon  an island  amid many 
perils, and our hands are more often upon the bowstring than upon the harp.  
     `The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for the 
Shadow has crept northward  all about  us. Some speak of departing, yet  for  
that it already seems too  late. The mountains to the west are growing evil; 
to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron's creatures; and  it  is 
rumoured  that we cannot  now safely pass southward  through  Rohan, and the 
mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come 
to 
the shores of the Sea, we  should  find no  longer any shelter there. It  is 
said that there are still havens of. the High Elves, but they are  far north 
and west, beyond the land of  the Halflings.  But where  that may be, though 
the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.' 
     `You ought  at  least to guess,  since you have seen  us,' said  Merry. 
`There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire where Hobbits live.' 
     `Happy folk  are  Hobbits to dwell  near  the shores of the sea! ' said 
Haldir. 'It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet still 
we remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.' 
     `I cannot,' said Merry. `I have never seen them.  I have never been out 
of my own la nd before. And if I had known what the world outside was like. I 
don't think I should have had the heart to leave it.' 
     `Not even to see fair Lothlurien? '  said Haldir.  'The world is indeed 
full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; but still there is much 
that is fair, and  though in all lands love is  now  mingled with  grief, it 
grows perhaps the greater. 
     `Some there are among us  who sing that  the Shadow  will draw back and 
peace shall come again.  Yet I do not believe  that  the world about us will 
ever again be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun as it was aforetime. 
For the Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a truce, in which they may pass 
to  the  Sea  unhindered  and  leave the Middle-earth  for  ever.  Alas  for  
Lothlurien that I  love! It would be a  poor life in a land where no mallorn 

####-grew.  But  if  there  are  mallorn-trees beyond  the Great Sea,  none  have 
reported it.' 
     As they spoke  thus, the  Company filed slowly along the  paths  in the 
wood, led by Hald ir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground 
beneath their  feet smooth and  soft, and  after  a while they  walked  more 
freely, without fear of hurt or  fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo  found 
his hearing and  other senses  sharpened. He could smell the  trees and  the 
trodden  grass.  He could hear many  different notes in  the  rustle  of the 
leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on  his right, and  the thin clear 
voices of birds in  the sky. He  felt the sun upon his face  and hands  when 
they passed through an open glade. 
     As  soon  as he  set  foot  upon the  far  bank of Silverlode a strange 
feeling had come upon  him, and it  deepened as he walked on into the Naith: 
it seemed to him that  he had stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of 
the  Elder Days, and  was  -now walking  in  a world that  was  no  more.  In 
Rivendell  there was memory of  ancient things; in Lurien the ancient things 
still lived on  in the waking world. Evil had been  seen  and  heard  there, 
sorrow had been known; the Elves  feared and  distrusted the world  outside: 
wolves  were howling on  the wood's borders: but  on  the land  of Lurien no 
shadow lay. 
     All that day the  Company marched on, until  they felt the cool evening 
come and heard  the early night-wind whispering among many leaves. Then 
they 
rested and slept without fear upon the ground;  for  their guides would  not 
permit  them to unbind their eyes, and they could  not climb. In the morning 
they went  on again,  walking without  hast e. At noon they halted, and Frodo  
was aware that they had  passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard 
the sound of many voices all around him. 
     A marching host of Elves  had  come up silently:  they  were  hastening 
toward the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria; and they 
brought news,  some of  which Haldir reported. The marauding orcs  had  been 
waylaid and  almost all destroyed; the remnant had fled westward towards the 
mountains, and were being pursued.  A strange creature also  had  been seen, 
running with bent back and  with hands near the ground, like a beast and yet  
not of beast-shape. It  had eluded  capture, and  they had not  shot it, not 
knowing whether it was good or ill, and  it had vanished down the Silverlode 
southward. 

####-     `Also,' said Haldir, `they bring me a message from the Lord and Lady of 
the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf Gimli. It seems that 
the  Lady knows who and what is each member of  your  Company.  New 
messages 
have come from Rivendell perhaps.' 
     He  removed the  bandage  first from Gimli's eyes.  'Your pardon! '  he 
said, bowing low. `Look on  us now with friendly eyes! Look and be glad, for  
you are the  first  dwarf to behold the  trees of the Naith of  Lurien since 
Durin's Day! ' 
     When  his eyes were in  turn uncovered, Frodo looked up  and caught his 
breath.  They were  standing  in an  open  space. To the  left stood a great 
mound, covered with  a sward of grass as  green as Spring-time in the  Elder  
Days.  Upon it , as a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the  outer had 
bark  of  snowy white,  and  were leafless  but  beautiful in  their shapely 
nakedness;  the inner were mallorn-trees of great height,  still arrayed  in 
pale  gold. High  amid  the branches of a  towering  tree that stood in  the 
centre of all there gleamed a white flet. At the feet of  the trees, and all 
about  the  green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden  flowers 
shaped  like  stars.  Among them,  nodding  on  slender  stalks,  were  other  
flowers, white and palest green: they glimmered  as a mist amid the rich hue 
of  the  grass. Over all the sky was blue, and  the sun  of afternoon glowed 
upon the hill and cast long green shadows beneath the trees.  
     'Behold! You  are come to Cerin Amroth,' said Haldir. `For this is  the 
heart  of the ancient realm  as it  was long ago, and here is the  mound  of 
Amroth, where in  happier days his high house was built. Here ever bloom the 
winter  flowers  in the  unfading grass:  the  yellow  elanor, and the  pale 
niphredil. Here we will stay awhile, and  come  to the city of the Galadhrim 
at dusk.' 
     The  others  cast themselves down  upon the  fragrant grass,  but Frodo 
stood  awhile still lost in wonder.  It seemed  to him that  he  had stepped 
through a high window  that looked on a vanished world. A light was  upon it 
for which his language  had no  name.  All that  he saw was shapely, but the 
shapes  seemed at once clear cut, as  if they had  been first conceived  and 
drawn at the uncovering of  his eyes, and ancient as if they had endured for  
ever. He saw no colour but those he knew, gold and white and blue and green, 
but  they were  fresh  and poignant,  as if  he  had  at  that  moment first  

####-perceived them and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter  here 
no 
heart  could  mourn for summer  or  for spring.  No  blemish  or sickness or  
deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth. On the land of 
Lurien there was no stain. 
     He  turned  and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking round 
with a  puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as  if he was not sure that 
he was  awake. `It's  sunlight  and bright  day, right enough,'  he said. `I  
thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than 
anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was  inside a song. if you take 
my meaning.' 
     Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning of both 
thought  and  word.  He  smiled. `You  feel the  power of  the  Lady of  the 
Galadhrim,' he said. `Would it please you  to climb with me up Cerin Amroth?  
' 
     They followed  him  as  he stepped lightly up  the  grass-clad  slopes.  
Though he walked and  breathed, and about him living leaves and flowers were 
stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo felt that  he was in 
a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When 
he had gone and passed again into  the outer world, still Frodo the wanderer  
from the Shire would walk there, upon the  grass among  elanor and niphredil 
in fair Lothlurien. 
     They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the  South  Wind 
blew  upon Cerin Amroth and  sighed among the  branches. Frodo  stood still, 
hearing far off_ great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away, 
and sea -birds crying whose race had perished from the earth. 
     Haldir  had gone on and was  now  climbing to the high  flet. As  Frodo 
prepared to follow him,  he laid his hand  upon the  tree beside the ladder: 
never before had  he been  so  suddenly and so keenly aware of the  feel and 
texture of a tree's skin and of the life within  it. He  felt  a  delight in 
wood and  the touch of it, neither  as forester nor as carpenter; it was the 
delight of the living tree itself. 
     As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his hand 
and turned him toward the South. `Look this way first! ' he said. 
     Frodo looked  and saw, still at some  distance, a  hill of many  mighty 
trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out of it, 
it seemed  to him that the  power and light came that held all the  land  in 

####-sway. He longed suddenly to fly like a bird to rest in the  green city. Then  
he looked  eastward and  saw all the land of Lurien running down to  the pale  
gleam of Anduin, the Great  River.  He lifted his  eyes across the river and 
all the light went out, and he  was back again in the world he knew.  Beyond 
the river  the land  appeared flat and empty,  formless and vague, until far 
away  it  rose  again  like  a  wall, dark  and drear.  The sun that lay  on 
Lothlurien had no power to enlighten the shadow of that distant height. 
     `There  lies  the fastness of  Southern  Mirkwood,' said Haldir. `It is 
clad in a forest of dark fir, where the trees strive one against another and 
their branches rot and wither. In the midst upon a  stony height  stands Dol 
Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is 
inhabited again,  and with power sevenfold. A black cloud lies often over it 
of  late. In this high place you may see the two powers that are opposed one  
to another;  and ever  they  strive now  in thought,  but whereas the  light 
perceives  the very  heart of  the darkness,  its  own  secret has not  been 
discovered. Not yet.' He turned and climbed swiftly down, and  they followed 
him. 
     At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still  and silent as a  
tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in 
his eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as Frodo looked  at him he 
knew that he beheld things as they once had been in this same place. For the 
grim years were removed from the  face of Aragorn, and he  seemed clothed in 
white, a  young lord  tall and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue 
to one whom Frodo could not see . Arwen vanimelda, nambril! he said, and then 
he drew a breath, and returning  out  of his thought  he looked at Frodo and 
smiled. 
     `Here  is the  heart of Elvendom on earth,' he said, `and here my heart 
dwells  ever,  unless there  be a light beyond the dark roads that  we still 
must tread, you and I. Come with  me!  ' And taking Frodo's hand in  his, he 
left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. The Mirror of Galadriel 

 
 
     The  sun  was  sinking  behind  the  mountains,  and the  shadows  were 
deepening in the woods, when  they went on again.  Their paths now went into 
thickets  where  the dusk had already gathered. Night came beneath the trees 
as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lamps.  
     Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves under a 
pale evening sky pricked by a  few early  stars.  There  was a wide treeless 
space  before  them, running in a  great circle  and bending  away on  either  
hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon its 
brink was green, as if it  glowed still in memory of the sun that  had gone. 
Upon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a  
green hill thronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen  in 
all the land. Their height  could not be  guessed,  but they stood up in the 
twilight like living towers. In  their, many-tiered branches and amid  their 
ever -moving  leaves  countless  lights were  gleaming,  green and  gold  and  
silver. Haldir turned towards the Company. 
     `Welcome to  Caras  Galadhon!  ' he  said. 'Here  is the  city  of  the 
Galadhrim where dwell  the Lord Celeborn  and Galadriel  the Lady of Lurien. 
But we  cannot enter here,  for  the gates do not look northward. We must go  
round to the  southern side,  and the  way is  not  short,  for the city  is 
great.' 
     There was a road  paved with white stone  running on the outer brink of 
the  fosse. Along this  they wen t westward, with the city  ever  climbing up 
like  a  green cloud upon their left; and as the night deepened  more lights 
sprang forth, until all the  hill seemed afire with stars. They came at last 
to  a white  bridge, and crossing found  the  great gates of the  city: they 
faced south-west, set between the  ends of the  encircling  wall  that  here 
overlapped, and they were tall and strong, and hung with many lamps.  
     Haldir knocked  and  spoke,  and the gates  opened soundlessly; but  of 
guards Frodo could see no sign. The  travellers passed within, and the gates 
shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the ends of the wall, and 
passing quickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could 
they  see, nor  hear  any feet upon the paths;  but  there were many voices,  
about them, and  in the air  above. Far away up  on the hill they could hear 

####-the sound of singing falling from on high like soft rain upon leaves.  
     They went along many paths and climbed many  stairs, until they came to 
the high places and saw before them amid a wide  lawn a fountain shimmering. 
It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the boughs of trees,  and it fell 
into a  basin of silver, from which a white stream spilled.  Upon the  south 
side of the lawn  there stood the mightiest  of  all  the trees;  its  great 
smooth  bole  gleamed  like  grey  silk, and up it  towered, until its first 
branches, far above, opened their huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves.  
Beside it  a  broad white ladder stood, and   at  its foot three  Elves  were 
seated. They sprang up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they 
were tall and  clad in grey  mail, and from their shoulders hung long  white 
cloaks. 
     'Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,'  said Haldir.  `It is  their  wish 
that you should ascend and speak with them.' 
     One of the  Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn, and  it 
was answered  three times from far  above. `I will  go first,' said  Haldir. 
'Let Frodo come  next and  with him  Legolas. The others may follow  as they 
wish. It is a  long climb for those that are not  accustomed to such stairs,  
but you may rest upon the way.' 
     As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some on one side, some 
on  another,  and some set about  the  bole of the tree,  so that the ladder  
passed through them. At a  great height above the ground he came to  a  wide 
talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that 
almost  it would have served  for  a hall of Men upon the earth. He  entered 
behind  Haldir, and found that he was  in a chamber of oval  shape,  in  the 
midst of which grew the trunk of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its 
crown, and yet making still a pillar of wide girth. 
     The chamber was  filled with a  soft  light; its walls were  green  and 
silver and  its roof  of gold. Many Elves were  seated there.  On two chairs 
beneath the  bole of the tree and canopied by a living bough there sat, side 
by side, Celeborn and Galadriel.  They stood up to greet  their guests, after  
the  manner  of Elves, even those who were accounted mighty kings. Very tall 
they were, and the Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave  and 
beautiful.  They were clad wholly  in white; and the hair of the Lady was of 
deep gold, and the hair of the  Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright; 
but no sign  of  age was upon  them, unless it were  in  the depths of their 
eyes; for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet  profound, the 

####-wells of deep memory. 
     Haldir led  Frodo  before them, and the  Lord welcomed  him in his  own 
tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon his face. 
     `Sit  now beside  my chair, Frodo of the Shire!  ' said Celeborn. `When 
all have come we will speak together.' 
     Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name  as they entered.  
`Welcome Aragorn son  of Arathorn! ' he said. `It is eight  and thirty years 
of the world outside since you came to this land;  and those years lie heavy 
on you. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for  
a while! ' 
     'Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from 
the North.' 
     `Welcome Gimli  son of  Gluin!  It is long indeed since  we  saw one of 
Durin's folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our  long  law. May 
it be a sign that though  the world is now dark better days are at hand, and 
that friendship shall be renewed between our peoples.' Gimli bowed low. 
     When all  the guests were seated before his chair   the  Lord  looked at 
them again. 'Here there  are eight,' he said. `Nine were to set out: so said 
the messages. But maybe  there has been some  change of counsel that we have 
not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this 
year the shadows have grown longer.' 
     `Nay, there was no change of counsel,' said the Lady Galadriel speaking 
for the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeper than woman's 
wont. `Gandalf the Grey  set out  with the Company, but he did  not pass the 
borders of this land.  Now tell us where he is; for  I much desired to speak 
with him again. But  I cannot see him from afar,  unless he comes within the 
fences of Lothlurien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and 
of his mind are hidden from me.' 
     'Alas! ' said Aragorn. `Gandalf the Grey fell into  shadow. He remained 
in Moria and did not escape.' 
     At these words  all the  Elves in the  hall  cried aloud  in grief  and 
amazement. `These are evil tidings,' said Celeborn, `the most evil that have 
been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.' He turned to Haldir. 
`Why  has nothing  of  this  been  told  to me before?  '  he  asked in  the 
Elven-tongue. 
     'We  have  not spoken  to  Haldir of  our  deeds or our purpose,'  said 
Legolas. `At  first  we were  weary and  danger  was  too close  behind  and 

####-afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time,  as  we walked in gladness 
on the fair paths of Lurien.' 
     `Yet our grief  is  great  and our loss  cannot be mended ,' said Frodo. 
'Gandalf was our guide, and he led us  through  Moria; and when  our  escape 
seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.' 
     'Tell us now the full tale! ' said Celeborn: 
     Then  Aragorn  recounted  all  that  had  happened  upon  the  pass  of 
Caradhras, and in  the  days that followed;  and  he spoke  of Balin and his 
book, and the fight in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the fire, and the narrow 
bridge, and  the  coming of the Terror.  'An  evil  of  the Ancient World it 
seemed,  such as  I have  never seen before,' said  Aragorn. `It  was both a  
shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.' 
     'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,' said Legolas; `of  all elf-banes the most  
deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.' 
     `Indeed I saw  upon  the bridge that  which haunts our darkest dreams l 
saw Durin's Bane,' said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes. 
     'Alas!  ' said Celeborn.  `We long have feared that  under Caradhras  a  
terror slept.  But had  I known that the Dwarves had st irred up this evil in 
Moria again,  l  would have forbidden you to pass the  northern borders, you  
and all that went with you. And  if it were possible, one would  say that at 
the last  Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net 
of Moria.' 
     `He would be rash indeed that said that thing,' said Galadriel gravely. 
`Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those that followed him 
knew not  his mind and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may be 
with the  guide, the followers are blameless.  Do not repent of your welcome  
to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long  and far from Lothlurien, who 
of the Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not 
wish 
to look upon their ancient home, though it  had become an abode of dragons?  
     'Dark  is  the  water  of  Kheled-zvram, and cold  are the  springs  of 
Kibil-nvla,  and  fair were  the many-pillared halls  of Khazad-dym in Elder  
Days before  the fall of mighty  kings beneath  the stone.' She looked  upon 
Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the 
names given in his own ancient tongue,  looked up and met her  eyes;  and it 
seemed  to him that he looked  suddenly  into the heart of  an enemy and saw 
there love and understanding. Wonder came into his face, and then  he smiled 

####-in answer. 
     He rose clumsily and bowed  in dwarf-fashion, saying: `Yet more fair is 
the living land of  Lurien, and the Lady Galadriel is above  all the  jewels 
that lie beneath the earth! ' 
     There was  a silence.  At length Celeborn spoke again. `I did  not know 
that your plight was so evil,' he said. `Let Gimli  forget my harsh words: I 
spoke in  the trouble of  my heart. I will do what I  can  to aid you,  each 
according  to his wish and need, but especially  that one of the little folk  
who bears the burden.' 
     'Your quest is known to us,' said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. `But  we 
will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove, maybe, 
that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed.  
For  the  Lord of  the  Galadhrim is  accounted the wisest of  the Elves  of 
Middle-earth, and a giver of  gifts beyond  the power of kings. He has dwelt  
in  the  West  since  the days of  dawn, and  I have dwelt  with  him  years 
uncounted;  for  ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin  I  passed over the 
mountains, and together through ages  of  the world we have fought  the long 
defeat. 
     'I it was who first summoned  the White Council. And  if my designs had 
not  gone amiss, it would  have been  governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then 
mayhap things would have  gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I 
will not give you  counsel, saying do this,  or do that. For not in doing or  
contriving, nor  in  choosing between this course and another, can  I avail; 
but  only in knowing what was  and is, and in part also  what shall  be. But 
this I will  say to you: your Quest  stands upon the edge of a knife.  Stray 
but a little and it will fail, to the ruin  of  all. Yet hope remains  while 
all the Company is true.' 
     And  with that word  she held them with her eyes, and in silence looked 
searchingly at  each  of them  in turn. None save  Legolas and Aragorn could 
long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and hung his head. 
     At  length  the  Lady Galadriel  released them from her  eyes,  and she 
smiled. `Do not let your hearts be troubled,' she said. 'Tonight  you  shall 
sleep in peace.' Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary, as those who have 
been questioned long and deeply, though no words had been spoken openly.  
     `Go now! ' said Celeborn. `You are worn with sorrow and much toil. Even 
if  your Quest did  not concern us  closely, you should  have refuge in this 
City, until you were  healed and refreshed. Now  you shall rest, and we will 

####-not speak of your further road for a while.' 
     That night the Company slept upon the ground, much  to the satisfaction 
of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion  among  the trees  near 
the fountain, and in it they laid soft couches; then speaking words of peace 
with fair  elvish voices they left  them.  For a little while the travellers 
talked of their night  before in the tree-tops, and of  their day's journey, 
and of the Lord and  Lady;  for they had not yet the  heart to  look further  
back. 
     `What  did you  blush for, Sam?  ' said  Pippin. `You soon  broke down. 
Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing 
worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets.' 
     `I never thought no such thing,' answered Sam, in no mood for jest. 'If 
you  want to know, I felt as if I hadn't  got nothing on,  and I didn't like 
it. She seemed to be looking inside  me and asking me what I would do if she 
gave me the chance of  flying back home to the Shire to a nice  little  hole 
with-with a bit of garden of my own.' 
     `That's funny,' said Merry. 'Almost  exactly what I felt  myself; only, 
only well, I don't think I'II say any more,' he ended lamely. 
     All  of them, it seemed, had fared  alike:  each  had felt that  he was 
offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and something 
that he greatly  desired: clear before his mind it lay, and to get it he had 
only to  turn  aside from the road and  leave the Quest and  the war against 
Sauron to others.  
     `And it seemed  to me, too,'  said Gimli, `that my choice  would remain 
secret and known only to myself.' 
     'To me it seemed exceedingly strange,' said Boromir. `Maybe it was only 
a test,  and she thought to read our thoughts  for her own good purpose; but 
almost I  should  have said that she was tempting us, and offering  what she 
pretended to have the power to give. It  need not be  said that I refused to 
listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their word.' But what he thought 
that the Lady had offered him Boromir did not tell. 
     And as for Frodo, he would  not speak, though  Boromir pressed him with 
questions. `She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,' he said. 
     `Yes,'  said Frodo; `but whatever  came into my  mind  then I will keep 
there.' 
     `Well, have a care!  ' said  Boromir.  `I do not feel too sure  of this 
Elvish Lady and her purposes.' 

####-     `Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel! ' said Aragorn sternly. 'You know 
not what you say.  There is in her  and in  this land no evil, unless a  man 
bring  it  hither himself.  Then let him beware!  But  tonight I shall sleep 
without  fear  for the first time  since  I left Rivendell. And may  I sleep 
deep, and forget for a while my grief! I am weary in body and in  heart.' He 
cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once into a long sleep. 
     The others soon did the same, and no sound  or  dream  disturbed  their 
slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day  was broad upon the 
lawn before the pavilion.  and  the fountain rose and fell glittering in the 
sun. 
     They remained some  days in Lothlurien, so  far as they could  tell  or 
remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun  shone clear, save for  
a gentle  rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all  things fresh 
and clean. The air was cool and  soft, as if it were  early spring, yet they 
felt about them the deep  and thoughtful quiet of winter.  It seemed to them 
that they did little but  eat and drink and  rest, and walk among the trees;  
and it was enough. 
     They had not seen  the Lord and Lady  again, and they had little speech 
with the Elven-folk; for few of these  knew or would use the Westron tongue. 
Haldir  had  bidden them  farewell and gone back again to the  fences of the 
North, where great watch was  now kept since the tidings of Moria  that  the 
Company had  brought. Legolas  was away much among the Galadhrim,  and 
after 
the  first  night  he  did not sleep with  the  other companions,  though he 
returned  to  eat and talk with them. Often he  took Gimli with him  when he 
went abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change. 
     Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of Gandalf, and 
all  that  each had  known and seen of  him came clear before their minds. As 
they  were healed of hurt and weariness of body the grief of their loss grew 
more keen. Often they heard nearby Elvish voices singing, and knew that they 
were making songs  of  lamentation  for his fall,  for they caught  his name 
among the sweet sad words that they could not understand. 
     Mithrandir, Mithrandir  sang  the Elves, O Pilgrim Grey!  For  so  they 
loved  to  call  him.  But if Legolas was with  the  Company,  he would  not 
interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that for  
him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song. 
     It was Frodo who first put something of his sorrow into  halting words.  

####-He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Rivendell he had 
listened 
and had not sung himself, though his memory was stored with many things that 
others had made before him. But now as he sat beside the  fountain in Lurien 
and heard  about  him the  voices of the Elves, his thought took shape  in a  
song that seemed fair to him;  yet  when he  tried to repeat it to Sam  only 
snatches remained, faded as a handful of withered leaves. 
     When evening in the Shire was grey 
     his footsteps on the Hill were heard; 
     before the dawn he went away 
     on journey long without a word. 
 
     From Wilderland to Western shore, 
     from northern waste to southern hill, 
     through dragon-lair and hidden door 
     and darkling woods he walked at will. 
 
     With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men, 
     with mortal and immortal folk, 
     with bird on bough and beast in den, 
     in their own secret tongues he spoke. 
 
     A deadly sword, a healing hand, 
     a back that bent beneath its load; 
     a trumpet-voice, a burning brand, 
     a weary pilgrim on the road. 
 
     A lord of wisdom throned he sat, 
     swift in anger, quick to laugh; 
     an old man in a battered hat 
     who leaned upon a thorny staff. 
 
     He stood upon the bridge alone 
     and Fire and Shadow both defied; 
     his staff was broken on the stone, 
     in Khazad-dym his wisdom died. 
     `Why, you'll be beating Mr. Bilbo next! ' said Sam. 

####-     'No, I am afraid not,' said Frodo. 'But that is the best I can do yet.' 
     'Well, Mr. Frodo, if  you  do have another go, I hope you'll say a word 
about his fireworks,' said Sam. `Something like this:  
     The finest rockets ever seen: 
     they burst in stars of blue and green, 
     or after thunder golden showers 
     came falling like a rain of flowers. 
     Though that doesn't do them justice by a long road.' 
     `No,  I'll  leave that  to  you,  Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But-well. I 
can't talk of  it any more. I can't bear to think  of bringing  the news  to 
him.' 
     One  evening Frodo and Sam were walking  together in the cool twilight.  
Both of them  felt restless again. On  Frodo suddenly the  shadow of parting  
had fallen: he  knew somehow that the time was very near when  he must leave 
Lothlurien. 
     `What do you think of Elves now, Sam?  ' he said. `I asked you the same 
question once before-it   seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more 
of them since then.' 
     'I  have  indeed!  ' said Sam. 'And I reckon  there's  Elves and Elves.  
They're  all  elvish enough,  but they're not all the same. Now  these  folk  
aren't wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes of us: they 
seem to belong here, more even than Hobbits do in the Shire. Whether they've 
made the land, or  the  land's  made them, it's hard to say,  if you take my 
meaning. It's  wonderfully  quiet here.  Nothing seems to  be going on,  and 
nobody  seems to  want it to. If  there's any magic  about,  it's right down 
deep, where I can't lay my hands on it, in a manner of speaking.' 
     'You can see and feel it everywhere,' said Frodo. 
     'Well,' said Sam, 'you can't  see nobody working  it. No  fireworks like 
poor Gandalf used to  show. I  wonder  we  don't see nothing of the Lord and 
Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things, 
if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo!  ' 
     'I  wouldn't,' said Frodo.  `I am content.  And I don't  miss Gandalf's 
fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.' 
     `You're right,'  said  Sam.  `And don't think I'm  finding  fault. I've 
often wanted to  see a  bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales, but 
I've never heard of a  better land than this. It's like being at home and on 
a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don't want to leave. All 

####-the same,  I'm beginning to feel that if we've got to go on,  then we'd best 
get it over. 
     'It's the  job that's never started as takes longest  to finish, as  my 
old gaffer used to say. And I don't reckon that these folk  can do much more 
to  help us, magic or no. It's  when we leave  this land that we shall  miss 
Gandalf worse, I'm thinking.' 
     'I  am afraid that's only too  true, Sam,' said Frodo. `Yet I hope very 
much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again.' 
     Even as he spoke, they saw,  as if she  came in answer to their  words,  
the  Lady Galadriel  approaching. Tall and white and fair she walked beneath 
the trees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them. 
     Turning aside, she led them  toward  the southern slopes of the hill of 
Caras Galadhon,  and passing through  a high green  hedge they  came into an 
enclosed  garden. No trees  grew there,  and it  lay open  to the  sky.  The 
evening star had risen and  was  shining with white  fire above  the western 
woods.  Down a long flight of steps the Lady went into   a deep green hollow, 
through which ran murmuring the silver stream that issued from the  fountain 
on  the hill.  At the bottom, upon a  low  pedestal  carved like a branching 
tree, stood a basin  of silver.  wide  and shallow, and beside  it  stood  a  
si lver ewer. 
     With water from the stream Galadriel  filled the basin to the brim, and 
breathed  on it, and when the water  was still again she spoke. `Here is the 
Mirror  of Galadriel,'  she said.  'I have  brought you here so that you may 
look in it, if you will.' 
     The air was very still, and the dell  was dark, and the Elf-lady beside 
him was tall and pale. 'What shall we  look  for,  and what shall we  see? ' 
asked Frodo, filled with awe. 
     `Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,' she a nswered, `and to  
some I can  show  what  they desire  to see. But the  Mirror will  also show 
things unbidden,  and those  are  often stranger  and more  profitable  than 
things which we  wish  to behold. What you will see, if you leave the Mirror  
free to work, I cannot tell.  For it shows things that were, and things that 
are,  things  that yet may be. But which it is that he sees, even the wisest  
cannot always tell. Do you wish to look? ' 
     Frodo did not answer. 
     `And you? ' she said, turning to Sam.  'For this is what your folk would 
call magic. I  believe;  though I  do not understand clearly what they mean; 

####-and  they seem also to use  the  same word of the  deceits of the Enemy. But 
this, if you will, is  the  magic of Galadriel. Did  you not  say  that  you  
wished to see Elf-magic?  ' 
     'I did,' said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. `I'll 
have a peep, Lady, if you're willing.' 
     `And I'd not mind  a glimpse of what's going on at home,' he said in an 
aside to  Frodo.  'It seems a terrible  long time that  I've been  away. But 
there, like  as  not I'll only  see the  stars,  or something that  I  won't  
understand.' 
     'Like as not,' said the Lady with a gentle laugh. `But come,  you shall 
look and see what you may. Do not touch the water! ' 
     Sam climbed up  on  the foot of the pedestal and leaned over the basin. 
The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reflected in it. 
     `There's only stars, as I thought,'  he said. Then he gave a  low gasp, 
for  the stars went out. As if  a dark  veil had  been withdrawn, the Mirror  
grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and the branches  of trees 
were waving and tossing in the  wind. But before Sam could make  up his mind 
what it  was that he saw, the  light faded; and  now he thought he saw Frodo 
with  a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed 
to see  himself going along  a dim passage, and climbing an endless  winding 
stair. It came to him suddenly that he was looking urgently  for  something, 
but what it was he  did not know. Like a dream the vision  shifted and  went  
back, and he  saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and  
he could see what was  going on: they were not waving in the wind, they were 
falling, crashing to the ground. 
     `Hi!' cried Sam  in  an  outraged  voice.  'There's  that Ted  Sandyman 
a-cutting down trees as he  shouldn't. They didn't ought to be  felled: it's 
that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater. I  wish I could  
get at Ted, and I'd fell him ! ' 
     But  now  Sam  noticed  that the Old  Mill had  vanished,  and  a large 
red-brick building was being put up  where it had stood. Lots of  folk  were 
busily  at work. There was a tall red chimney nearby.  Black smoke seemed to 
cloud the surface of the Mirror. 
     'There's some devilry at work in the Shire,' he said. 'Elrond knew what 
he  was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.' Then suddenly Sam 
gave 
a cry and sprang away. 'I can't stay here,' he said wildly. `I must go home. 

####-They've dug up Bagshot Row, and there's the  poor old gaffer  going down the 
Hill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must go home! ' 
     'You cannot go home alone,' said the Lady. 'You did not wish to go home 
without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and  yet  you knew that 
evil things might well be happening in the  Shire.  Remember that the Mirror 
shows many things, and not all have yet come to pass. Some never come to be, 
unless those that behold the visions turn aside  from their path to  prevent 
them. The Mirror is dangerous as a guide of deeds.' 
     Sam  sat on  the  ground and  put his head in his hands. `I  wish I had 
never come  here, and I don't want to see  no  more magic,' he said and fell 
silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly, as if struggling with  tears. 
`No, I'll go home by the long road with Mr. Frodo, or  not at all,' he said. 
`But I hope I  do  get  back some  day. If  what  I've  seen turns out true, 
somebody's going to catch it hot! ' 
     `Do you now  wish to look , Frodo? '  said  the Lady Galadriel. `You did 
not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.' 
     `Do you advise me to look? ' asked Frodo. 
     'No,' she said. `I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am  not a  
counsellor.  You may  learn something, a nd  whether what you  see be fair or 
evil, that  may be profitable,  and yet it may not. Seeing is both good  and 
perilous. Yet  I think, Frodo, that you have courage and  wisdom enough  for 
the venture, or I would not have brought you here. Do as you will!   ' 
     `I will look,' said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent over  
the  dark  water.  At once the Mirror  cleared  and  he  saw  a twilit land. 
Mountains  loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A  long grey road 
wound back out of sight.  Far away a figure came slowly down the road, faint 
and  small at  first,  but  growing  larger and  clearer  as it  approached. 
Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded  him  of Gandalf. He  almost called 
aloud the wizard's name, and then he saw that  the figure was clothed not in 
grey but in  white, in  a white  that shone faintly in the dusk; and  in its 
hand  there was  a white staff. The  head was so bowed that he could see  no 
face,  and  presently the figure turned aside round  a bend in the road  and 
went out  of  the Mirror's  view. Doubt came into Frodo's  mind:  was this a  
vision of Gandalf on one of his  many  lonely  journeys long  ago, or was it 
Saruman?  
     The vision now  changed. Brief and  small but  very vivid  he  caught a  
glimpse of  Bilbo  walking restlessly about his room. The table was littered 

####-with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows. 
     Then there  was a pause, and after  it many swift scenes followed  that 
Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which he had become 
involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen before 
but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose  and raged in a great 
storm. Then  he saw  against  the  Sun, sinking  blood-red into a  wrack  of 
clouds,  the black outline  of a tall ship with torn sails riding up  out of 
the  West.  Then a wide river flowing through a  populous city. Then a white  
fortress with seven towers. And then again a ship with  black sails, but now 
it was morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing  
the  emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke  as of fire and battle 
arose, and again the  sun went  down in a burning red that faded into a grey 
mist; and into the mist a small  ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It 
vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away. 
     But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as  if a hole had 
opened in the world  of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness. In the black  
abyss there appeared a single Eye  that slowly grew. until it  filled nearly 
all  the  Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to  cry 
out  or  to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with fire, but  was itself 
glazed, yellow as a cat's, watchful  and  intent, and  the black slit of its 
pupil opened on a pit, a window into nothing. 
     Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knew 
with certainty  and  horror that  among  the  many things that it sought  he 
himself  was one. But  he also knew that  it could not see him-not yet,  not 
unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon its  chain  about his neck grew 
heavy, heavier than a great stone,  and his  head was dragged downwards. The 
Mirror  seemed  to be growing hot and  curls  of steam were rising  from the 
water. He was slipping forward. 
     `Do not touch the water!' said the  Lady  Galadriel softly. The  vision 
faded,  and Frodo found that he was  looking  at the cool stars twinkling in 
the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady. 
     `I know what it was that you  last saw,' she said; `for that is also in 
my mind. Do not be  afraid! But do  not think that only by singing  amid the 
trees, nor  even by  the  slender arrows of  elven-bows,  is  this  land  of 
Lothlurien maintained and defended against its  Enemy. I say  to you, Frodo, 
that  even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or  
all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he gropes ever to see me and my 

####-thought. But still the door is closed! ' 
     She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards the East 
in a  gesture of  rejection  and  denial. Edrendil, the Evening  Star,  most  
beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it that the figure of 
the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring 
about  her  finger; it  glittered like  polished  gold overlaid  with silver 
light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even -star had come down to 
rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed  
to him that he understood. 
     `Yes,' she said, divining his thought, `it is not permitted to speak of 
it,  and  Elrond  could  not  do  so.  But  it  cannot  be  hidden from  the 
Ring-bearer,  and  one who has seen  the Eye.  Verily it is in the  land  of 
Lurien upon  the finger of Galadriel  that one of the Three remains. This is 
Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeper. 
     `He suspects, but  he  does not  know  --  not  yet. Do you not see now 
wherefore your  coming is to us as  the footstep  of  Doom? For if you fail, 
then we are  laid  bare to the Enemy.  Yet if you succeed, then our power is 
diminished, and Lothlurien will fade, and the  tides  of  Time will sweep it 
away. We must depart into the  West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell  and 
cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.' 
     Frodo bent his head. `And what do you wish? ' he said at last. 
     `That  what should be shall be,' she answered.  `The love of the  Elves 
for  their land  a nd  their works is deeper than the deeps of  the Sea,  and 
their regret  is  undying and cannot ever  wholly be assuaged. Yet they will 
cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they know him  now.  For the 
fate of Lothlurien you are not answerable but only for the doing of your own  
task. Yet I  could wish, were it of any avail, that the One  Ring had  never 
been wrought, or had remained for ever lost.' 
     'You are wise  and fearless  and fair, Lady  Galadriel,' said Frodo. `I  
will give  you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter for  
me.' 
     Galadriel laughed  with a sudden clear laugh. `Wise the  Lady Galadriel 
may be,' she said, `yet here she has met her match in  courtesy. Gently  are 
you revenged for my testing of your heart at our first meeting. You begin to  
see with a keen eye. I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to  ask  
what you offer. For many long  years I  had pondered what I might do, should 
the  Great  Ring come  into my hands, and behold!  it was brought  within my 

####-grasp. The evil that was devised long ago  works on  in many  ways,  whether 
Sauron himself stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set  
to the credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?  
     `And now a t last  it comes. You will give me the Ring  freely! In place  
of  the Dark Lord  you will set up  a  Queen. And I shall  not  be dark, but 
beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the 
Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Drea dful as the Storm and the 
Lightning!  
Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall love me and despair! ' 
     She  lifted up her hand and from the  ring that she wore there issued a  
great  light that  illuminated her  alone  and left all else dark. She stood 
before  Frodo seeming  now  tall beyond  measurement, and  beautiful  beyond 
enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the light 
faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and  lo! she was  shrunken: a slender  
elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad. 
     'I pass the test,' she said. `I will diminish, and go into the West and 
remain Galadriel.' 
     They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke again. 
`Let us return! ' she  said. `In the morning you must depart for now we have 
chosen, and the tides of fate are flowing.' 
     `I  would  ask  one thing before we go,'  said Frodo, `a  thing which I 
often meant to  ask  Gandalf in Rivendell. I  am permitted to  wear  the One 
Ring: why  cannot I see all the others  and know the thoughts  of those that 
wear them? ' 
     `You have not tried,' she said. `Only thrice have you set the Ring upon 
your finger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try!  It would destroy 
you.  Did not Ganda lf tell  you that  the rings give power  according to the 
measure of each possessor? Before you could use that power you would need 
to 
become far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others. Yet 
even so, as Ring-bearer and as one that has borne it on finger and seen that 
which is hidden, your sight is grown keener. You  have perceived  my thought 
more clearly than many  that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that 
holds the  Seven and the Nine.  And  did  you not see and recognize the ring 
upon my finger? Did you see my ring? ' she asked turning again to Sam. 
     'No, Lady,' he  answered. `To tell you the truth, I  wondered what  you  
were talking about.  I  saw a star through your finger. But if you'll pardon 

####-my speaking  out,  I think my master was right. I  wish you'd take his Ring. 
You'd  put things  to  rights.  You'd  stop them digging up the  gaffer  and 
turning him adrift. You'd make some folk pay for their dirty work.' 
     `I would,' she said. `That is how it would begin. Bu t it would not stop 
with that, alas! We will not speak more of it. Let us go!' 

####- 
 

Chapter 8. Farewell to Lurien 

 
 
     That  night  the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn, 
and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words. At length Celeborn 
spoke of their departure. 
     `Now is the time,' he  said, `when those who wish to continue the Quest  
must harden their hearts to leave this land.  Those who no longer wish to go  
forward may remain here, for a while. But whether they stay or go, none  can 
be sure of  peace.  For we are come now to  the edge of doom. Here those who 
wish  may await  the oncoming of the hour till either the ways of  the world 
lie open again. or we summon them to the  last need of Lurien. Then they may 
return to their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in 
battle.' 
     There was a silence. `They all resolved to  go forward,' said Galadriel 
looking in their eyes. 
     `As for me,' said Boromir, `my way home lies onward and not back.' 
     `That is true,' said Celeborn, `but is all this Company  going with you  
to Minas Tirith? ' 
     `We have not decided our course,' said Aragorn. 'Beyond Lothlurien I do 
not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not think that even he had 
any clear purpose. ' 
     `Maybe not,' said  Celeborn, `yet when you leave this land, you  can no 
longer  forget  the Great  River.  As  some of you  know well, it  cannot be 
crossed  by travellers with baggage between Lurien and Gondor, save by boat. 
And are not the bridges  of Osgiliath broken down  and all the landings held 
now by the Enemy?  
     `On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon this 
side, upon  the  west; but the straight road of the Quest  lies east of  the 
River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take?  ' 
     `If my advice  is heeded, it will be the western shore,  and the way to 
Minas Tirith,' answered Boromir.  `But I  am not the leader of the Company.' 
The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled. 
     `I see that you do not yet know  what to do,' said Celeborn. `It is not 
my  part to choose for you; but I will help you as  I  may.  There are  some 

####-among  you who can handle  boats: Legolas, whose folk know  the swift Forest  
River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.' 
     `And  one Hobbit! ' cried Merry. `Not all of us look on  boats as  wild 
horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.' 
     `That is  well,' said Celeborn. `Then I will furnish  your Company with 
boats. They must be small and light, for  if you go far  by water, there are 
places where you will be forced to  carry them. You will come to  the rapids 
of Sarn  Gebir,  and maybe at  last to the  great falls of  Rauros where the 
River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there  are other perils. Boats may 
make your journey less toilsome for  a while.  Yet they  will  not  give you  
counsel:  in the  end  you must leave  them and the River, and turn  west -or 
east.' 
     Aragorn  thanked  Celeborn  many times. The gift of boats comforted him 
much, not least because there would now be no  need to decide his course for 
some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils  lay ahead, 
it seemed better to float down the broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to 
plod   forward  with  bent backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still 
thought boats as bad as wild horses, or worse, and not  all the dangers that 
he had survived made him think better of them. 
     `All shall be prepared for you and await you  at the  haven before noon 
tomorrow,'  said  Celeborn.  'I will send my people to you in the morning to 
help you make ready for the journey. Now we will  wish  you all a fair night  
and untroubled sleep.' 
     'Good  night,  my friends!  ' said Galadriel.  'Sleep in peace! Do  not 
trouble your  hearts overmuch with thought of  the road tonight.  Maybe  the 
paths that  you each  shall tread are  already laid before your feet, though 
you do not see them. Good night! ' 
     The  Company  now  took  their leave  and  returned to their  pavilion. 
Legolas  went with them, for this  was to be their last night in Lothlurien, 
and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take counsel together. 
     For a  long time they debated what they should do, and  how it would be 
best to attempt the fulfilling of their purpose with the Ring: but they came 
to no decision. It was plain that most of them desired to go  first to Minas 
Tirith, and to  escape at least for a while from  the  terror of  the Enemy. 
They would have been willing to follow a leader  over the River and into the  
shadow of Mordor; but Frodo spoke  no word, and Aragorn was still divided in 
his mind. 

####-     His  own  plan, while Gandalf remained with  them, had been to go  with 
Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he believed that the 
message of the dreams was a summons, and that the hour had come at last 
when 
the  heir of  Elendil  should  come  forth and  strive with  Sauron  for the 
mastery. But in Moria  the burden of Gandalf had been laid  on  him; and  he  
knew that he could not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in  the end to  
go with  Boromir. And  yet what help could he or any of the Company give  to 
Frodo, save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?  
     `I shall go to Minas Tirith,  alone if need be, for it is my duty,' said 
Boromir; and after  that he was  silent  for a while,  sitting with his eyes 
fixed  on Frodo, as if  he was trying  to  read the Halfling's thoughts.  At 
length he spoke  again, softly, as if he was debating  with himself. `If you  
wish only to destroy  the Ring,' he said,  `then there is little use in  war 
and weapons; and the Men of Minas  Tirith  cannot  help.  But if you wish to  
destroy the armed might  of the  Dark Lord,  then it is folly  to go without 
force into his domain; and folly  to throw away.' He  paused suddenly, as if 
he had  become aware that he was  speaking his thoughts aloud. `It  would be 
folly  to  throw  lives away,  I  mean,' he ended. `It is  a choice  between 
defending a  strong place  and   walking openly  into the arms  of death.  At  
least, that is how I see it.' 
     Frodo caught something  new  and strange  in  Boromir's glance, and  he 
looked hard at  him.  Plainly Boromir's thought was different from his final 
words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said 
something like this  at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction 
of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn,  but he seemed  deep in  his own thought 
and made no sign that he  had  heeded Boromir's wor ds.  And so  their debate 
ended. Merry and Pippin were  already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The 
night 
was growing old. 
     In the  morning, as they were  beginning  to  pack their slender goods,  
Elves that could speak their tongue came to them and brought them many gifts 
of food and clothing for the  journey.  The food was  mostly in the  form of 
very thin cakes, made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside, 
and inside  was  the colour of  cream. Gimli took  up one  of  the cakes and 
looked at it with a doubtful eye. 
     `Cram,' he said  under his breath,  as he broke off a crisp corner  and 

####-nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and  he ate  all the rest  of 
the cake with relish. 
     `No more,  no  more!' cried the  Elves laughing.  `You have eaten enough 
already for a long day's march.' 
     `I thought  it was  only a kind of cram, such as  the Dale-men make for 
journeys in the wild,' said the Dwarf.  
     `So it is,' they answered.  `But we call it   lembas or waybread, and it 
is mor e strengthening than any food made  by Men, and  it  is more  pleasant  
than cram, by all accounts.' 
     `Indeed it is,' said Gimli.  'Why it is better than  the honey-cakes of 
the Beornings,  and  that  is great praise,  for the Beornings  are the best 
bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out their cakes 
to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts! ' 
     'All the same, we bid you spare the food,' they  said. 'Eat little at a  
time,  and only at need. For these things  are given to  serve  you when all  
else fails.  The  cakes  will keep sweet  for  many many  days, if  they are 
unbroken and left in their leaf-wrappings, as we have brought them. One will 
keep a traveller on his feet for a day of  long labour, even if he be one of 
the tall Men of Minas Tirith.' 
     The  Elves next unwrapped  and gave to each  of the Company the clothes 
they  had  brought.  For  each they  had  provided a  hood  and cloak,  made 
according to his size, of the light but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim 
wove. It was  hard to say of what  colour they were:  grey with  the hue  of 
twilight under  the trees they seemed  to be; and yet if they were moved, or  
set in another light, they were green as shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow 
fields by  night, dusk -silver  as  water under  the  stars. Each  cloak  was 
fastened about the neck with a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver. 
     `Are these magic cloaks? ' asked Pippin, looking at them with wonder. 
     `I do  not  know what you mean by  that,' answered  the  leader  of the 
Elves. `They are fair garments, and the web is good, for it was made in this 
land. They are elvish robes certainly, if that is what  you  mean. Leaf  and  
branch, water and  stone: they have the hue and beauty  of all  these things 
under the twilight of Lurien that we  love; for  we  put the thought of  all 
that we love into all that  we make. Yet they  are garments, not armour, and 
they  will not turn shaft or blade. But they should serve you well: they are 
light to wear, and warm enough  or cool enough at  need.  And  you will find 
them a great aid in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you  

####-walk among the stones or the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of the 
Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never before have 
we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.' 
     After  their morning meal the Company said farewell to  the lawn by the 
fountain.  Their  hearts  were  heavy;  for it was a fair  place, and it had 
become like home to  them,  though they could not count the days and  nights 
that they had passed there. As they stood for a moment looking at the  white 
water in the sunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over the green grass 
of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight. 
     'I have  returned from the  Northern  Fences,'  said the Elf, `and I am 
sent  now  to be your guide again.  The Dimrill Dale is  full of vapour  and 
clouds of  smoke,  and the  mountains are troubled. There are noises in  the 
deeps  of the  earth. If any of you had thought  of returning northwards  to 
your homes, you would not have been able to pass  that  way. But come!  Your 
path now goes south.' 
     As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were empty; but in 
the trees above them many voices were murmuring and singing. They 
themselves 
went  silently. At last Haldir  led them down the  southward  slopes  of the 
hill, and they came again  to  the great  gate hung with  lamps, and to  the 
white  bridge; and so they  passed out and left the city of the Elves.  Then 
they turned  away from the paved road  and took  a path that went off into a  
deep  thicket  of  mallorn-trees,  and passed  on,  winding through  rolling 
woodlands  of  silver  shadow,  leading   them  ever  down,  southwards  and 
eastwards, towards the shores of the River. 
     They had gone  some ten miles and noon  was at hand when they came on a  
high green  wall. Passing through  an opening they came  suddenly out of the 
trees. Before them  lay a  long  lawn of shining grass, studded  with golden 
elanor  that  glinted  in the sun.  The lawn ran  out  into a narrow  tongue 
between  bright margins:  on  the  right  and  west  the  Silverlode  flowed 
glittering; on the left and  east the Great River  rolled its broad  waters, 
deep and  dark.  On  the  further  shores the  woodlands  still  marched  on 
southwards as far as the eye could see, but  all the banks  were  bleak  and 
bare. No mallorn lifted its gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lurien. 
     On  the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meeting of 
the  streams,  there was a hythe of white stones and  white wood. By it were 
moored many boats and  barges.  Some were  brightly painted, and shone  with 

####-silver and gold  and green, but most were either  white or grey. Three small 
grey boats had been made ready for  the travellers, and  in  these the Elves 
stowed their goods. And they added  also coils of rope, three  to each boat. 
Slender they looked, but strong,  silken  to the touch, grey of hue like the 
elven-cloaks.  
     `What  are  these?  '  asked  Sam,  handling  one  that  lay  upon  the 
greensward. 
     `Ropes indeed! ' answered an Elf  from the  boats.  'Never  travel  far 
without  a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such  are these. 
They may be a help in many needs.' 
     'You don't  need to  tell me  that! ' said Sam. `I came without any and 
I've been worried ever since. But I was wondering  what these  were made of,  
knowing a bit about rope -making: it's in the family as you might say.' 
     `They are made of hithlain ,' said the Elf, `but there is no time now to 
instruct  you  in  the  art of their making. Had we  known that  this  craft  
delighted  you, we  could  have taught  you  much. But  now alas! unless you 
should at some time return hither, you must be content with our gift. May it 
serve you well! ' 
     `Come! ' said Haldir.  `All is now ready  for you. Enter the boats! But 
take care at first! ' 
     'Heed the words! ' said the other  Elves. 'These boats are light-built, 
and they are crafty and  unlike the boats of other folk. They will not sink, 
lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It would be  wise 
if you accustomed yourselves to stepping  in and out,  here where there is a  
landing-place, before you set off downstream.' 
     The Company  was  arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in 
one boat; Boromir,  Merry,  and Pippin  in another; and  in the  third  were 
Legolas and Gimli, who  had now become fast friends. In this last boat  most 
of  the goods and packs were  stowed. The boats were moved and  steered with 
short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shaped blades. When all  was ready 
Aragorn led them  on a trial up  the Silverlode. The current  was  swift and 
they went  forward slowly. Sam sat  in the  bows,  clutching the  sides, and 
looking back wistfully to  the  shore. The sunlight  glittering on the water  
dazzled his eyes.  As they passed beyond the green field of the Tongue,  the 
trees  drew down to the  river's  brink. Here and there golden lea ves tossed 
and floated on the  rippling stream.  The air was very bright and still, and 
there was a silence, except for the high distant song of larks. 

####-     They turned a sharp bend in  the river, and there, sailing proudly down 
the stream toward them, they saw a  swan of great size. The water rippled on  
either  side of the white  breast beneath its curving neck. Its  beak  shone 
like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its 
huge white wings  were half lifted.  A music came down the river as it  drew 
nearer; and suddenly they perceived that it was  a ship, wrought  and carved 
with elven-skill in the likeness of  a bird. Two elves clad in white steered 
it  with  black paddles. In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind 
him  stood Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in her  
hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and  she sang. Sad and  sweet was the 
sound of her voice in the cool clear air: 
     I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold  there grew:  
     Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.  
     Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea, 
     And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree. 
     Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone, 
     In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion. 
     There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching years, 
     While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears. 
     O Lurien! The Winter comes, the bare and leafless Day; 
     The leaves are falling in the stream, the River flows away. 
     O Lurien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore 
     And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor. 
     But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me, 
     What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea? 
     Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The Lady ended 
her  song and greeted them. `We have come to bid you our last farewell,' she 
said, `and to speed you with blessings from our land . ' 
     `Though  you have  been our guests,'  said Celeborn, `you have  not yet 
eaten with  us, and we  bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here between 
the flowing waters that will bear you far from Lurien.' 
     The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their boats and 
followed it. There in the last  end  of  Egladil  upon  the  green grass the 
parting feast was held;  but Frodo ate  and drank  little,  heeding only the 
beauty of the Lady and her voice. She seemed no longer perilous or terrible,  
nor  filled with hidden power. Already she seemed to him, as by men of later 
days Elves still  at times are seen: present and yet remote, a living vision 

####-of that  which has already been left far behind by  the  flowing  streams of 
Time. 
     After they had eaten and drunk,  sitting upon the grass, Celeborn spoke 
to them again of their journey, and lifting his hand he pointed south to the 
woods beyond the Tongue. 
     `As you go down the water,' he said, `you will find that the trees will 
fail, and you  will come to a barren country. There the River flows in stony 
vale amid  high moors, until at last after many leagues it comes to the tall 
island  of the Tindrock,  that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its  arms 
about the steep shores of the  isle, and falls then  with a  great noise and 
smoke  over the cataracts of Rauros down into the Nindalf, the Wetwang as it 
is called in your  tongue.  That  is a wide region of sluggish fen where the 
stream becomes tortuous and much divided. There the Entwash flows in by 
many 
mouths from the Forest of  Fangorn  in the west. About that stream, on  this 
side of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the further side are the bleak hills 
of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the East there, for they look out over  
the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and the black gates of 
Mordor. 
     'Boromir, and any  that go with him seeking  Minas Tirith, will do well 
to leave the Great River  above Rauros and cross the Entwash before it finds 
the marshes.  Yet  they  should  not  go too far  up  that  stream, nor risk  
becoming entangled in the  Forest of Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is 
now  little  known. But  Boromir  and Aragorn  doubtless  do  not  need this 
warning.' 
     'Indeed we have heard  of Fangorn in  Minas Tirith,' said Boromir. `But 
what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives' tales, such as we  
tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is now  to us so far away 
that fancy can wander freely there. Of old Fangorn lay  upon the  borders of 
our realm; but it is now many lives of men since  any of  us  visited it, to 
prove or disprove the legends that have come down from distant years. 
     `I have myself  been at whiles in Rohan, but I have  never  crossed  it 
northwards. When I  was sent out as a messenger, I passed through the Gap by 
the skirts  of the White Mountains,  and crossed the Isen  and the Greyflood  
into Northerland.  A  long and wearisome  journey.  Four  hundred  leagues I 
reckoned it, and it took me many  months; for  I lost my horse at Tharbad, at 
the fording  of  the  Greyflood. After that  journey,  and  the road  I have 

####-trodden  with  this Company, I  do  not much doubt  that I shall find a  way 
through Rohan, and Fangorn too, if need be.' 
     `Then  I need say no more,' said Celeborn. 'But do not despise the lore 
that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance  that old wives 
keep in memory word of things that once were needful for the wise to know.' 
     Now Galadriel rose  from the grass, and taking a  cup  from one  of her  
maidens she filled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn. 
     'Now it is time  to drink the cup of  farewell,' she said. `Drink, Lord 
of  the Galadhrim!  And let not your heart be  sad though night  must follow 
noon, and already our evening draweth nigh.' 
     Then  she brought  the  cup to each of the Company, and bade them drink  
and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded them to sit again on the 
grass,  and  chairs were set  for her and  for Celeborn.  Her maidens   stood 
silent about her, and a while  she looked upon her guests. At last she spoke 
again. 
     'We have drunk  the cup of  parting,' she  said, `and the  shadows fall 
between us. But  before you go,  I have brought in  my ship gifts  which the 
Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer  you in memory of Lothlurien.' 
Then 
she called to each in turn. 
     `Here is  the gift  of Celeborn  and  Galadriel to the  leader  of your 
Company,' she  said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had been made 
to fit his sword.  It was  overlaid  with  a  tracery of flowers  and leaves 
wrought of silver and gold, and on it were set in elven runes formed of many 
gems the name And®ril and the lineage of the sword. 
     `The  blade  that  is  drawn from  this  sheath shall  not be stained or  
broken  even in  defeat,' she said. `But is there aught else that you desire 
of me at our parting? For  darkness will flow between us, and it may be that 
we shall  not meet  again, unless it be far  hence upon  a  road that has no 
returning.' 
     And Aragorn answered: 'Lady, you know  all my desire, and  long held in 
keeping the only  treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to give me, even 
if you would; and only through darkness shall I come to it.' 
     `Yet maybe this will lighten  your heart,' said Galadriel;  `for it was 
left in my care to be given to you, should you pass through this land.' Then 
she lifted from  her lap  a  great stone  of a clear green, set in  a silver  
brooch that  was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with  outspread  wings;  

####-and as  she held  it  up  the gem flashed  like the sun shining through  the 
leaves  of spring. `This  stone I  gave to Celebrnan my daughter, and she to 
hers; and now it comes to you as a token of hope. In this hour take the name 
that was foretold for you, Elessar, the Elfstone of the house of Elendil! ' 
     Then Aragorn took  the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast, and 
those  who  saw  him wondered; for they  had  not marked before how tall and 
kingly  he stood, and it seemed to  them that many years of toil  had  fallen 
from his shoulders. `For the  gifts that you have  given me I thank you,' he 
said, 'O Lady of  Lurien of whom were sprung Celebrnan  and Arwen  
Evenstar. 
What praise could I say more? ' 
     The Lady bowed her hea d, and she turned then to Boromir, and to him she 
gave a belt of gold; and to  Merry  and Pippin  she gave small silver belts, 
each  with a  clasp wrought like a golden flower. To Legolas she  gave a bow 
such as  the Galadhrim used,  longer and  stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, 
and strung with a string of elf-hair. With it went a quiver of arrows.  
     `For you little gardener and lover of trees,' she said to  Sam, `I have 
only a small gift.' She put into his hand a little box of plain  grey  wood, 
unadorned save for  a single silver rune upon the lid.  `Here  is set  G for  
Galadriel,' she said; `but  also it may stand  for garden in your tongue. In 
this box there is earth from my orchard, and such blessing  as Galadriel has 
still to bestow  is upon it. It will not keep  you on your  road, nor defend 
you  against any peril; but if you keep it and see your  home again at last, 
then perhaps it may reward  you.  Though you should find all barren and laid 
waste, there will be  few gardens in  Middle-earth that will bloom like your 
garden, if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may  remember  Galadriel, 
and catch a glimpse  far off  of Lurien,  that you  have  seen  only  in our 
winter.  For our spring and our summer are gone  by,  and they will never be 
seen  on earth again save in memory.' 
     Sam  went  red  to  the  ears  and muttered something inaudible, as  he 
clutched the box and bowed as well as he could. 
     `And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves? ' said Galadriel turning 
to Gimli. 
     `None,   Lady,' answered Gimli. `It is  enough for  me  to have seen the 
Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.' 
     `Hear all ye Elves! ' she cried to those about her. `Let none say again 
that Dwarves  are grasping  and ungracious! Yet surely, Gimli son of  Gluin, 

####-you desire something that I could give? Name it, I bid you! You shall not be 
the only guest without a gift.' 
     `There  is  nothing,  Lady  Galadriel,'  said  Gimli,  bowing  low  and 
stammering. `Nothing, unless it might be-unless it is permitted to ask. nay, 
to name a single strand of your hair, which  surpasses the gold of the earth 
as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But 
you commanded me to name my desire.' 
     The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and Celeborn gazed at 
the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. 'It is said that the  skill of the 
Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues ' she said; `yet that 
is not true of Gimli. For  none have ever  made to me a request  so bold and 
yet so  courteous. And  how shall I  refuse, since I commanded him to speak? 
But tell me, what would you do with such a gift? ' 
     `Treasure it, Lady,' he answered, `in memory of your words to me at our 
first meeting. And if ever I return to the  smithies of my home, it shall be 
set in imperishable crystal to  be an heirloom of my house, and a  pledge of 
good will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days.' 
     Then the  Lady unbraided  one  of her long tresses, and  cut o ff  three 
golden hairs, and laid them in Gimli's hand. `These words shall  go with the 
gift,' she said. `I do not foretell, for all foretelling is now vain: on the 
one hand lies darkness, and on the other only hope. But if  hope  should not 
fail, then I sa y to you, Gimli son of Gluin, that your hands shall flow with 
gold, and yet over you gold shall have no dominion. 
     `And you, Ring-bearer,' she said, turning to Frodo. `I come to you last 
who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared  this.'  She held up 
a small crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and rays of white light 
sprang from  her hand.  'In this  phial,' she said, `is  caught the light of 
Edrendil's  star,  set amid  the  waters of my fountain. It will shine still 
brighter when night is  about you. May it be a  light to you in dark places, 
when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and her Mirror! ' 
     Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between them, he saw 
her  again  standing  like a  queen,  great and  beautiful,  but  no  longer  
terrible. He bowed, but found no words to say. 
     Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to  the  hythe. A yellow 
noon lay  on the  green land  of  the Tongue, and  the water  glittered with 
silver. All at last was  made  ready. The Company took  their places in  the 
boats as  before. Crying farewell, the Elves of Lurien with long  grey poles 

####-thrust them out into the flowing stream, and  the rippling waters bore  them 
slowly  away. The  travellers  sat still  without moving or speaking. On the 
green  bank near to the very point  of the Tongue  the  Lady Galadriel stood 
alone and silent. As they passed her they  turned and their eyes watched her  
slowly  floating away  from  them.  For  so it seemed  to  them:  Lurien was 
slipping  backward, like a bright ship masted with enchanted trees,  sailing 
on to forgotten shores, while they sat  helpless upon the margin of the grey 
and leafless world. 
     Even as they gazed,  the Silverlode passed out into the currents of the 
Great River, and their boats turned  and began to speed southwards. Soon the 
white form of the Lady  was small and  distant. She  shone like a window  of 
glass  upon a far hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake seen from a  
mountain: a  crystal fallen in the lap of the land. Then  it seemed to Frodo 
that she lifted her arms in a  final farewell, and far but piercing-clear on 
the following wind came the sound of her voice singing. But now she  sang in 
the  ancient tongue of the Elves  beyond the Sea, and he  did not understand  
the words: fair was the music, but it did not comfort him. 
     Yet as is the way of Elvish words, they remained  graven in his memory,  
and long afterwards he interpreted  them, as well as he could:  the language 
was that of Elven -song and spoke of things little known on Middle-earth. 
     Ai! lauril lantar lassi s®rinen, 
     Yjni ®nutiml ve rbmar aldaron! 
     Yjni ve lintl yuldar avbnier 
     mi oromardi lisse-miruvureva 
     And®nl pella, Vardo tellumar 
     nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni 
     umaryo airetbri-lnrinen. 
 
     Sn man i yulma nin enquantuva? 
 
     An sn Tintalll Varda Oiolosslo  
     ve fanyar mbryat Elentbri ortanl 
     ar ilyl tier undulbvl lumbull; 
     ar sindanuriello caita mornil 
     i falmalinnar imbl met, ar hnsil 
     unt®pa Calaciryo mnri oiall. 
     Si vanwa nb, Rumello vanwa, Valimar! 

####-     Nambril! Nai hiruvalyl Valimar. 
     Nai elyl hiruva. Nambril! 
     `Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the  wind,  long years numberless  as 
the  wings of trees!  The long years have passed like  swift draughts of the 
sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue  vaults of Varda  
wherein the stars  tremble  in the  song of her voice, holy and queenly. Who  
now shall refill  the cup for me? For now the Kindler, Varda,  the  Queen of 
the Stars,  from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands like clouds, and all  
paths are drowned deep in shadow; and out of a grey country darkness lies on 
the foaming waves between  us, and mist  covers the jewels of Calacirya  for  
ever. Now lost, lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou 
shalt find Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt find it. Farewell!  ' Varda is the 
name of that Lady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth. 
     Suddenly the River  swept round a bend, and the banks rose  upon either 
side, and the light of Lurien was hidden. To that fair land Frodo never came 
again. 
     The travellers  now  turned their faces  to  the journey;  the  sun was 
before  them, and their  eyes were dazzled, for all were  filled with tears. 
Gimli wept openly. 
     `I have  looked  the  last  upon that which was  fairest,' he  said  to 
Legolas his companion. `Henceforward I will call  nothing fair, unless it be 
her gift.' He put his hand to his breast. 
     `Tell me,  Legolas, why  did I  come on this Quest?  Little did I  know 
where  the  chief peril  lay!  Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we  could not 
foresee what we might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark was the danger 
that I feared, and it did not hold me back. But I would not have come, had I 
known the  danger of light and joy. Now I have taken my worst wound in  this 
parting, even if I were to go this night straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for 
Gimli son of Gluin! ' 
     `Nay! ' said Legolas. `Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world 
in these after -days. For  such is the  way of  it:  to find and lose,  as it 
seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you blessed, 
Gimli son of Gluin: for your loss you suffer of your own  free will, and you  
might have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken  your companions, 
and 
the least reward that you shall have is that  the memory of Lothlurien shall 
remain ever clear  and unstained in your heart, and  shall neither  fade nor  

####-grow stale.' 
     `Maybe,' said  Gimli;  `and  I  thank you  for  your words.  True words 
doubtless; yet all  such  comfort  is cold.  Memory  is not  what  the heart 
desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zvram. Or  so says the 
heart  of Gimli  the Dwarf. Elves  may see  things otherwise.  Indeed I have 
heard that for them memory is more like to the waking world than to a dream. 
Not so for Dwarves.  
     'But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in the 
water with all this baggage, and  the Great River is swift. I do not wish to 
drown my grief in cold water.' He took up  a paddle, and steered towards the 
western bank, following Aragorn's boat ahead, which had already moved out of 
the middle stream. 
     So the  Company went on their long way, down the wide  hurrying waters,  
borne ever  southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank, and they could 
not see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze died  away and the River 
flowed without a sound. No voice  of  bird broke the silence.  The  sun grew 
misty as the day grew old, until it gleamed in a pale sky  like a high white 
pearl. Then it faded into the West, and dusk came  early, followed by a grey 
and  starless night. Far into the dark quiet hours they  floated on, guiding 
their boats under the overhanging shadows  of the western woods. Great trees 
passed  by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty  roots  through  the 
mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and  listened to 
the  faint lap and  gurgle  of  the River fretting among the  tree-roots and 
driftwood near the shore, until  his  head nodded and he fell into an uneasy 
sleep. 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. The Great River 

 
 
     Frodo  was roused  by Sam. He found  that  he was  lying, well wrapped,  
under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west 
bank of the  Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night  away, and the grey 
of morning was dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire 
near at hand. 
     They started  again  before   the day  was broad.  Not that most of  the 
Company were eager to hurry southwards: they were content that the decision, 
which they must make at  latest  when they came  to  Rauros and the Tindrock  
Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let the River  bear them on at its 
own  pace,  having no desire to hasten  towards  the perils that lay beyond, 
whichever course they  took in  the end. Aragorn  let  them  drift with  the 
stream as they wished, husbanding their  strength against weariness to come.  
But he insisted that at least they should  start early  each day and journey 
on  far into the evening; for he felt  in his heart that  time was pressing, 
and he  feared that the Dark Lord  had not been idle while  they lingered in 
Lurien. 
     Nonetheless  they saw no sign of  an enemy that  day, nor the next. The 
dull grey hours passed without event. As the third  day of their voyage wore 
on the lands changed slowly: the trees  thinned and  then failed altogether. 
On  the eastern bank to their left  they saw long formless slopes stretching 
up and away toward the sky; brown and withered they  looked, as  if fire had 
passed  over them, leaving no  living  blade of green:  an  unfriendly waste 
without even a broken tree or a  bold  stone to relieve the  emptiness. They 
had come to  the Brown Lands  that lay, vast and  desolate, between Southern 
Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed 
of the Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell. 
     Upon the west to their  right the land was treeless  also,  but it  was 
flat, and  in many places green  with wide plains of grass. On this side  of 
the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut out all 
view to  the  west,  as  the  little  boats  went   rustling by  along  their 
fluttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in  the light 
cold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through  openings  Frodo 
could catch sudden  glimpses of rolling meads, and far  beyond them hills in 

####-the  sunset, and  away on  the edge of sight a dark line, where marched  the 
southernmost ranks of the Misty Mountains.  
     There was no sign of living moving  things,  save birds. Of these there 
were many: small  fowl whistling  and  piping in  the reeds,  but  they were 
seldom seen.  Once  or  twice the  travellers  heard  the rush  and whine of 
swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky. 
     `Swans! ' said Sam. `And mighty big ones too! ' 
     `Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and they are black swans.' 
     `How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! '  said Frodo.  
`I  always imagined  that as one journeyed  south it got warmer and merrier,  
until winter was left behind for ever.' 
     'But we  have not journeyed  far south yet,'  answered Aragorn. `It  is 
still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world  is cold until the 
sudden spring, and we  may yet have snow again. Far away down in the Bay  of 
Belfalas, to which Anduin runs, it is warm and merry, maybe, or would be but 
for the  Enemy. But here we are  not above sixty  leagues, I guess, south of 
the Southfarthing away in your Shire, hundreds of long miles yonder. You are 
looking now south-west across the north  plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the 
land of the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlight 
that runs  down from Fangorn to join  the  Great  River. That  is  the north 
boundary  of Rohan; and  of old all that lay between  Limlight and the White 
Mountains belonged to the Rohirrim. It  is a rich and pleasant land, and its 
grass has no rival; but in these evil days folk do not dwell by the River or  
ride often  to its shores.  Anduin  is  wide, yet  the orcs  can shoot their 
arrows  far across  the stream; and of late, it is said,  they have dared to 
cross the water and raid the herds and studs of Rohan.' 
     Sam looked from bank to  bank  uneasily. The trees had  seemed  hostile 
before, as if they harboured secret eyes and  lurking dangers; now he wished  
that  the trees were still  there. He felt  that the  Company was too naked, 
afloat in  little open  boats  in  the midst of shelterless  lands, and on a  
river that was the frontier of war. 
     In  the  next day  or two, as they went on, borne  steadily southwards, 
this feeling  of insecurity grew  on  all the Company. For  a whole day they 
took to  their  paddles  and  hastened forward. The banks  slid by. Soon the 
River broadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches lay upon the east, 
and  there were  gravel-shoals  in  the water, so that  careful steering was 
needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds, over which flowed a chill air 

####-from  the  East. On  the  other  side the meads had  become rolling downs of 
withered grass amidst a land of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of 
the lawns and fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlurien. There 
was little speech and  no laughter  in any of  the boats. Each member of the 
Company was busy with his own thoughts.  
     The heart of  Legolas was running under  the stars of a summer night in 
some  northern glade amid  the beech-woods; Gimli  was fingering gold in his 
mind, and wondering if it were  fit to be  wrought into the  housing  of the 
Lady's gift.  Merry and  Pippin in the middle  boat  were  ill at  ease, for  
Boromir sat muttering  to himself, sometimes biting his nails,  as  if  some 
restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes  seizing a paddle and  driving 
the boat  close behind Aragorn's. Then Pippin, who sat  in  the bow  looking 
back, caught a queer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo.  
Sam had  long  ago  made up his mind  that,  though boats were maybe  not as 
dangerous  as  he  had been  brought  up  to  believe,  they were  far  more 
uncomfortable  than even  he had  imagined. He was   cramped  and  miserable, 
having nothing to do but stare at the winter -lands crawling by and the  grey 
water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in use they  did not 
trust Sam with one. 
     As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over the bowed 
heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he was drowsy and 
longed 
for camp and the feel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught his 
sight: at first he stared  at it listlessly, then  he sat  up and rubbed his 
eyes; but when he looked again he could not see it any more. 
     That night they camped  on a small eyot close to  the western bank. Sam 
lay rolled  in  blankets  beside Frodo. `I had a funny dream an hour or  two 
before we  stopped, Mr.  Frodo,' he said. `Or maybe it wasn't a dream. Funny 
it was anyway.' 
     `Well,  what was it? ' said  Frodo,  knowing that  Sam would not settle 
down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. 'I haven't seen or thought 
of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlurien.' 
     `It wasn't funny that way, Mr. Frodo.  It was  queer.  All wrong, if it 
wasn't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with 
eyes!  ' 
     `The log's  all right,' said Frodo.  `There are  many in the River. But 
leave out the eyes!  ' 

####-     `That I won't,'  said Sam. ` 'Twas  the eyes as made me sit  up,  so to 
speak. I saw what I took to be a log floating along in the half-light behind 
Gimli's boat; but I didn't  give much heed to it. Then  it seemed as if  the 
log  was slowly  catching us  up. And  that  was peculiar, as you might say, 
seeing as we were all  floating on  the stream together. Just then I saw the 
eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a hump at the  near end of the 
log. What's  more, it  wasn't a  log, for it had  paddle-feet, like a swan's 
almost, only they seemed bigger, and kept dipping in and out of the water. 
     'That's when  I sat right up  and rubbed  my  eyes,  meaning  to give a  
shout,  if  it was still there  when I had rubbed the drowse out of my head.  
For the whatever -it-was was coming along fast now and  getting close  behind 
Gimli. But whether those two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or whether 
I came to my senses, I don't know. When I looked again, it wasn't there. Yet  
I  think I caught a glimpse with  the tail  of-my eye, as the saying  is, of 
something dark shooting under the shadow of the bank. I couldn't see no more 
eyes though. 
     `I said to myself: "dreaming again, Sam Gamgee," I said: and  I said no 
more just then. But  I've been  thinking since. and now I'm not so sure. What 
do you make of it, Mr. Frodo? ' 
     'I  should make nothing of it  but a log and the dusk and sleep in your 
eyes Sam, said  Frodo, if this was the  first  time that those eyes had been 
seen. But it isn't. I saw them away back north before we reached Lurien. And 
I saw  a strange creature with eyes climbing to the  flet that night. Haldir 
saw it too. And do you remember the report of the  Elves that went after the  
orc-band?  ' 
     `Ah,'  said  Sam. `I  do;  and  I remember  more too.  I don't  like my 
thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo's stories and 
all, I fancy I  could put a name on the creature,  at a guess. A nasty name. 
Gollum, maybe?  ' 
     `Yes, that  is what  I  have feared for  some  time,' said  Frodo. `Ever  
since  the night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and  picked 
up our trail then;  but I hoped that our stay in Lurien would throw  him off 
the scent again. The miserable creature must  have  been hiding in the woods 
by the Silverlode, watching us start off! ' 
     `That's about it,'  said Sam. `And  we'd better be a  bit more watchful 
ourselves,  or we'll  feel some  nasty fingers  round our necks one of these 
nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. And   that's what I  was leading 

####-up to. No need to trouble  Strider or the others tonight. I'll keep watch. I 
can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.' 
     `I might,' said Frodo, `and I might say "luggage with eyes".  You shall 
watch; but only if  you promise  to  wake me  halfway  towards  morning,  if 
nothing happens before then.' 
     In the  dead hours Frodo came out  of a  deep dark  sleep  to find  Sam 
shaking him. `It's a shame to wake you,' whispered Sam, `but that's what you 
said. There's  nothing  to  tell,  or not much. I thought I heard  some soft  
plashing and a sniffing noise, a while  back;  but  you hear  a lot  of such 
queer sounds by a river at night.' 
     He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets,   and fought off 
his sleep. Minutes or hours passed  slowly, and  nothing happened. Frodo was 
just yielding  to the temptation to lie down again when a dark shape, hardly 
visible, floated close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand could  
be dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes 
shone coldly as  they peered inside, and then they  lifted  and gazed up  at 
Frodo  on the eyot. They were not more than a yard or  two  away,  and Frodo 
heard  the  soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting from its 
sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut  off. There was 
another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot away downstream  into 
the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up` 
     'What is it? ' he whispered, springing  up and coming to Frodo. `I felt 
something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? ' 
     `Gollum,' answered Frodo. 'Or at least, so I guess.' 
     `Ah! '  said Aragorn. `So you know about our little footpad, do you? He 
padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel. Since we  took  
to boats,  he has been lying on a  log  and paddling with  hands and feet. I 
have tried  to catch him once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox, 
and a s slippery as a  fish. I hoped the river -voyage would beat him, but  he 
is too clever a waterman. 
     `We  shall have to  try going faster tomorrow. You lie down  now, and I 
will keep watch for what is left of the night.  I wish I could  lay my hands 
on the wretch.  We might make him useful. But if I cannot, we shall have  to 
try  and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on 
his own account, he may put any enemy that is about on our track.' 
     The night  passed without  Gollum showing  so  much as  a shadow again. 
After that the Company kept a sharp look -out, but they saw no more of Gollum 

####-while  the voyage lasted.  If he  was still following, he  was very wary and 
cunning.  At Aragorn's bidding they paddled now  for  long  spells, and  the 
banks went  swiftly  by.  But  they  saw little  of the  country,  for  they 
journeyed mostly by night and  twilight, resting by day, and lying as hidden  
as the  land  allowed.  In this way the  time passed without event until the 
seventh day. 
     The weather was still grey and overcast,  with  wind from the East, but 
as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and pools of faint 
light,  yellow and pale green, opened under  the grey shores of cloud. There 
the white rind of the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remote lakes.  
Sam looked at it and puckered his brows.  
     The next  day the  country on either side began to change  rapidly. The 
banks began to rise and grow stony.  Soon they were passing through a  hilly 
rocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes buried in deep brakes 
of thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and creepers. Behind them stood low 
crumbling  cliffs, and  chimneys of  grey weathered stone dark with ivy; and 
beyond  these again there  rose high ridges crowned with wind-writhen  firs.  
They were  drawing near to  the  grey  hill-country of  the  Emyn  Muil, the 
southern march of Wilderland. 
     There were many birds about the cliffs and  the  rock -chimneys, and all 
day high in  the  air flocks of  birds  had been circling, black against the 
pale sky. As  they  lay  in their  camp that day Aragorn watched the flights 
doubtfully, wondering if Gollum had been doing some mischief and the news 
of 
their voyage was now moving in the wilderness. Later as the sun was setting, 
and the Company was stirring and getting ready to start again, he descried a  
dark  spot against the  fading light:  a  great bird high  and far  off, now 
wheeling, now flying on slowly southwards. 
     'What is that, Legolas? ' he  asked, pointing to the northern sky.  'Is 
it, as I think. an eagle? ' 
     'Yes.' said  Legolas.  `It is an eagle, a hunting  eagle. I wonder what 
that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.' 
     `We will not start until it is fully dark,' said Aragorn. 
     The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless; the 
grey east wind had passed away. The thin  crescent  of the  Moon had  fallen  
early into the pale sunset, but the sky was clear above, and though far away 
in the South there were great ranges of cloud that still  shone faintly,  in 

####-the West stars glinted bright. 
     `Come! ' said Aragorn. `We will  venture one more journey  by night. We 
are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well: for I have never  
journeyed by water  in these parts before, not between here and the rapids of 
Sarn  Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning, those are  still many  miles 
ahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we come there: rocks and 
stony  eyots in the stream. We must keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle  
swiftly.' 
     To Sam in  the leading  boat  was given the  task  of watchman. He  lay 
forward peering into the  gloom.  The night grew dark,  but the stars  above 
were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer On the face of the River.  It 
was close  on  midnight,  and they had been drifting for  some while. hardly  
using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried out.  Only a few yards ahead dark 
shapes loomed up in the stream and he heard the swirl of racing water. There 
was  a swift  current which swung left,  towards the eastern shore where the 
channel was clear. As they were swept aside  the travellers could  see,  now 
very close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were 
thrust out  far  into the stream like a  ridge of  teeth. The boats were all 
huddled together. 
     `Hoy  there, Aragorn! '  shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped  into  the 
leader.  `This is madness! We cannot  dare the Rapids  by night! But no boat 
can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or  day.' 
     `Back,  back! ' cried Aragorn. 'Turn! Turn if you can!  '  He drove his 
paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round. 
     'I am  out of my reckoning,' he said to Frodo.  'I did not know that we 
had come so  far: Anduin  fl ows faster  than I thought.  Sarn Gebir must  be 
close at hand already.' 
     With  great  efforts  they  checked  the boats and slowly brought  them 
about; but at first they  could make only small headway against the current, 
and all  the time they were  carried nearer and  nearer to the eastern bank. 
Now dark and ominous it loomed up in the night. 
     'All together,  paddle!  '  shouted  Boromir. 'Paddle! Or  we  shall be 
driven on the  shoals.' Even as  he  spoke  Frodo felt the  keel beneath him 
grate upon stone. 
     At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows whistled  
over  them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo between the  
shoulders 

####-and he lurched forward with a cry, letting go his paddle: but the arrow fell 
back. foiled by his hidden  coat of mail. Another passed  through  Aragorn's 
hood; and a  third  stood fast in the gunwale of  the  second boat, close by 
Merry's hand. Sam thought he could glimpse black  figures running to and fro 
upon the long  shingle-banks that lay under  the eastern shore.  They seemed 
very near. 
     `Yrch!' said Legolas, falling into his own tongue. 
     `Orcs! ' cried Gimli. 
     `Gollum's doing, I'll be bound.' said  Sam to Frodo. `And  a nice place 
to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! ' 
     They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam took a hand. 
Every moment they expected to feel the bite  of black -feathered arrows. Many 
whined overhead or struck the  water nearby; but there were no more hits. It  
was dark,  but  not  too  dark  for  the  night-eyes of  Orcs,  and  in  the 
star-glimmer they must have offered  their cunning foes some mark, unless it 
was that  the grey cloaks Of Lurien and  the grey timber of the  elf-wrought 
boats defeated the malice of the archers of Mordor. 
     Stroke by  stroke they  laboured on. In the darkness it  was hard to be 
sure that they were indeed moving at  all; but slowly the swirl of the water  
grew less, and the  shadow of the eastern bank faded back into the night . At 
last, as far as they  could judge, they had reached the middle of the stream 
again and had driven their boats back some distance above the jutting rocks.  
Then  half turning they  thrust them  with all  their  strength towards  the 
western shore. Under  the  shadow Of bushes leaning  out  over the water they 
halted and drew breath. 
     Legolas laid down his paddle and took  up the  bow that he had  brought 
from  Lurien. Then he  sprang ashore  and climbed  a few paces up  the bank. 
Stringing the bow  and  fitting an arrow  he turned, peering back  over  the 
River into  the darkness.  Across  the water  there were  shrill  cries, but 
nothing could be seen. 
     Frodo looked up at the Elf  standing tall above him, as he  gazed  into 
the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned with sharp 
white  stars that glittered in  the  black pools  of the sky behind. But now 
rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds advanced, sending  out 
dark outriders into the starry fields. A sudden dread fell on the Company. 
     `Elbereth Gilthoniel!' sighed Legolas as he  looked up.  Even as he did 
so,  a dark shape, like a cloud and yet  not a cloud, for it moved far  more 

####-swiftly,  came out  of the blackness in  the  South,  and  sped towards  the 
Company, blotting out  all  light as it approached. Soon  it  appeared as  a  
great  winged creature, blacker  than the pits in  the night. Fierce  voices 
rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chill running 
through him and clutching  at his heart;  there was  a deadly cold, like the 
memory of an old wound, in his shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide. 
     Suddenly  the great bow of  Lurien sang. Shrill went the arrow from the 
elven-string.  Frodo looked up. Almost above  him the  winged shape swerved. 
There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing down 
into the gloom of  the eastern  shore. The sky was clean again.  There was a  
tumult  of many voices far away, cursing and  wailing in  the darkness,  and  
then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night. 
     After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt  their way 
along  the water's edge for some distance, until they  found a small shallow 
bay. A  few low  trees grew there close to the water, and behind them rose a  
steep  rocky  bank. Here the Company decided to stay and await the  dawn: it 
was useless  to attempt to move further by night.  They made no camp and lit 
no fire, but lay huddled in the boats, moored close together. 
     'Praised be  the bow  of Galadriel, and the  hand and eye of Legolas! ' 
said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of lembas. 'That was a mighty shot in  the 
dark, my friend!' 
     'But who can say what it hit?' said Legolas. 
     'I cannot,' said Gimli. `But  I am glad that the shadow came no nearer. 
I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria -- the 
shadow of the Balrog,' he ended in a whisper. 
     'It  was not a Balrog,' said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that 
had come upon him.  'It was  something  colder.  I think it was   --' Then he 
paused and fell silent. 
     'What do you think? ' asked Boromir eagerly, leaning  from his boat, as 
if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo's face. 
     `I think -- No, I will not say,' answered Frodo. `Whatever it was,  its 
fall has dismayed our enemies.' 
     `So  it seems,' said Aragorn. `Yet where they  are,  and how many,  and 
what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all be sleepless!  
Dark hides  us now. Bu t what the  day  will  show  who can tell?  Have  your 
weapons close to hand! ' 
     Sam  sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he  were  counting on  his 

####-fingers, and looking up at  the sky. `It's very strange,' he  murmured. `The  
Moon's the same in the Shire  and  in  Wilderland, or  it  ought  to be. But 
either it's out of its running, or  I'm all  wrong  in my  reckoning. You'll 
remember,  Mr. Frodo, the  Moon was waning as we lay on the  flet up in that 
tree: a  week from the full,  I reckon. And we'd been a week on the way last  
night, when up pops  a New Moon as thin as a nail -paring, as if we had never 
stayed no time in the Elvish country. 
     `Well, I can  remember three  nights  there for certain,  and I seem to 
remember several more, but I would   take my oath it was never a whole month. 
Anyone would think that time did not count in there! ' 
     `And perhaps that was the way of it,' said Frodo. `In that land, maybe, 
we  were in  a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was  not,  I  think, 
until Silverlode bore us  back to Anduin that we returned  to the time  that 
flows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I don't  remember any moon, 
either new or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sun by day.' 
     Legolas stirred in his boa t. `Nay, time does  not tarry ever,' he said; 
`but change and growth is not in all  things and places alike. For the Elves 
the world moves, and it  moves both very swift and very slow. Swift, because 
they  themselves change little,  and all else  fleets by:  it is a  grief to 
them. Slow, because they do not count the running years, not for themselves. 
The  passing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in  the long long stream. 
Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last.' 
     `But the wearing is slow in Lurien,' said Frodo. `The power of the Lady 
is on it.  Rich are  the hours,  though short they  seem, in Caras Galadhon, 
where Galadriel wields the Elven -ring.' 
     'That should not have  been said  outside Lurien, not even to me,' said 
Aragorn. `Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land you lost your 
count.  There time  flowed swiftly by  us,  as  for the Elves. The  old moon 
passed,  and  a new  moon waxed  and waned  in  the world  outside, while we 
tarried there. And yestereve a  new  moon came again.  Winter is nearly gone. 
Time flows on to a spring of little hope.' 
     The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again  across the 
water. The  travellers  huddled  in  their  boats  felt the  changing of the 
weather. The air grew  warm and very still under the great moist clouds that 
had floated up from the South and the distant seas. The rushing of the River  
over the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow  louder and closer. The twigs of 
the trees above them began to drip. 

####-     When the day came the mood of the world about them had become soft  and 
sad. Slowly  the dawn grew  to a  pale light, diffused and shadowless. There 
was mist on the River, and white fog  swathed the shore; the far  bank could 
not be seen. 
     `I can't abide fog,' said  Sam; `but this  seems to be a lucky one. Now 
perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.' 
     `Perhaps so,'  said Aragorn. `But it  will  be  hard to find  the  path 
unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must find the path, if we are 
to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.' 
     'I  do  not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the  River  any 
further,' said Boromir. `If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandon 
these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward, until we come to  the 
Entwash and cross into my own land.' 
     `We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,' said Aragorn, `but that is 
not yet agreed. And such a course  may be more perilous than  it sounds. The 
vale of Entwash is flat and fenny, and fog is a deadly peril there for those 
on foot and laden. I would not abandon our boats until we must. The River is 
at least a path that cannot be missed.' 
     `But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,' objected  Boromir. `And even if 
you pass the Gates  of  Argonath and come  unmolested  to the Tindrock, what 
will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes? ' 
     `No! ' answered Aragorn. `Say rather that we will bear our boats by the 
ancient  way to  Rauros-foot, and  there take to the water again. Do you not 
know, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North Stair, and the high seat 
upon  Amon Hen,  that were made in the  days of the great  kings? I at least 
have a mind  to stand in that high place again,  before I decide  my further  
course. There, maybe, we shall see some sign that will guide us.' 
     Boromir held out  long  against this choice;  but  when it became plain 
that Frodo  would  follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave  in. 'It is not 
the  way  of the  Men of Minas Tirith to  desert their friends at  need,' he 
said, `and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. 
To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There  I shall  turn to my home, 
alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship.' 
     The day  was  now  growing,  and  the fog  had lifted a  little. It was 
decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along the  shore, 
while the  others remained  by the  boats. Aragorn hoped to find some way by 
which they could carry  both  their boats and their  baggage to the smoother  

####-water beyond the Rapids.  
     `Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,' he said, `but that does not 
say that  we should come through Sarn  Gebir  alive.  None have ever done so 
yet. No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this region, for even in their 
great  days  their realm did not reach up  Anduin beyond the Emyn  Muil; but 
there is a portage-way somewhere on  the western shore, if I can find it. It 
cannot yet have perished; for light boats used to journey  out of Wilderland 
down to Osgiliath, and still did so until a few years ago, when the Orcs  of 
Mordor began to multiply.' 
     'Seldom in my life has any boat come  out of  the North,  and  the Orcs 
prowl on the east-shore,' said Boromir. `If you go forward, peril  will grow 
with every mile, even if you find a path.' 
     `Peril lies ahead on every southward road,' answered Aragorn. `Wait for  
us one day.  If we do  not return in that time, you will know that  evil has 
indeed befa llen us. Then you must take a new leader  and follow him as  best 
you can.' 
     It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb  the 
steep bank and vanish into the  mists; but his fears proved groundless. Only 
two or three hours had passed, and it  was barely mid-day, when  the shadowy 
shapes of the explorers appeared again. 
     `All is well,' said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank. 'There is a  
track,  and  it leads  to  a good landing  that  is still  serviceable.  The 
distance is not great: the head of the Rapids is but half  a mile below  us,  
and  they  are little more than a mile long.  Not far beyond them the stream 
becomes clear  and  smooth again,  though it runs  swiftly. Our hardest task  
will be to get our boats and baggage   to the old  portage-way. We have found 
it, but it lies well  back from  the water -side here, and runs under the lee 
of  a rock -wall, a furlong or more from the shore. We did not find where the 
northward  landing  lies. If it  still  remains,  we  must  have  passed  it 
yesterday night. We might labour far upstream and yet miss it in the  fog. I 
fear we must leave the River now, and make  for the  portage-way  as best we 
can from here.' 
     `That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,' said Boromir. 
     `Yet such as we are we will try it,' said Aragorn. 
     'Aye, we  will,' said Gimli. `The legs of Men will lag on a rough road, 
while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir! ' 
     The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The goods were 

####-taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank, where there was a  
level space. Then the boats were drawn out of the water and carried up. They 
were  far less heavy than any  had  expected.  Of what  tree growing in  the 
elvish country  they were made not even Legolas knew; but the wood was 
tough 
and yet strangely light. Merry and Pippin alone could  carry their boat with 
ease  along the  flat. Nonetheless it  needed the strength of the two Men to 
lift  and haul them  over the ground that the  Company  now had to cross. It 
sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of  grey  limestone-boulders,  
with many hidden holes  shrouded with weeds and bushes;  there were thickets 
of brambles,  and sheer dells;  and here and there boggy pools fed by waters 
trickling from the terraces further inland. 
     One  by  one  Boromir and  Aragorn  carried the boats, while the others 
toiled  and scrambled after them with the baggage. At last  all was  removed 
and laid  on the  portage-way. Then with little further hindrance, save from 
sprawling briars and many fallen  stones, they  moved forward all  together.  
Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling rock -wall, and to their left mist 
shrouded the River: they  could hear it  rushing  and foaming over the sharp 
shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they 
made the journey, before all was brought safe to the southern landing. 
     There the portage-way, turning back  to the water -side, ran gently down 
to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been  scooped in the 
river -side, not by hand,  but by the  water  swirling  down  from Sarn Gebir 
against a low pier of  rock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond  
it the shore rose sheer into a grey  cliff, and there was no further passage 
for those on foot. 
     Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was closing 
in. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush and roar of the 
Rapids hidden in the mist; they wer e tired and sleepy, and their hearts were 
as gloomy as the dying day. 
     'Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,' said Boromir. 
`We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath 
by night, we are all too tired-except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.' 
     Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat. 
     `Let us rest as much  as  we can now,' said  Aragorn. `Tomorrow we must 
journey by day again. Unless the weather changes once more and cheats us, we 
shall have  a good chance  of slipping through, unseen  by any eyes  on  the 

####-eastern shore. But tonight two must watch together in turns: three hours off 
and one on guard.' 
     Nothing happened that night  worse than a brief drizzle of rain an hour 
before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already the fog was 
thinning. They kept as  close as they could  to  the western  side, and they 
could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher, shadowy walls 
with  their  feet in the hurrying river. In the mid-morning the  clouds drew 
down  lower,  and it began to rain heavily. They drew  the  skin-covers over  
their boats to prevent them from being flooded, and drifted on: little could 
be seen before them or about them through the grey falling curtains. 
     The rain,  however, did  not  last  long.  Slowly  the  sky above  grew 
lighter,  and  then  suddenly the clouds broke,  and  their draggled fringes 
trailed away northward up the  River. The  fogs and mists were  gone. Before 
the travellers  lay  a wide ravine, with  great rocky sides to which  clung, 
upon  shelves  and in narrow crevices, a few thrawn  trees. The channel grew 
narrower and the River swifter. Now  they were speeding  along  with  little  
hope of stopping or turning, whatever they might meet ahead. Over them was a  
lane of pale-blue sky, around them  the dark overshadowed  River, and before 
them  black, shutting out  the  sun,  the hills of  Emyn Muil, in  which  no 
opening could be seen. 
     Frodo peering  forward saw in the distance two great rocks approaching:  
like  great pinnacles or pillars  of stone  they seemed.  Tall and sheer and 
ominous they stood upon either  side of the  stream. A  narrow  gap appeared 
between them, and the River swept the boats towards it. 
     `Behold the Argonath, the Pillars  of  the Kings! ' cried  Aragorn. `We 
shall pass them soon. Keep the boats  in  line, and as far apart as you can!  
Hold the middle of the stream! ' 
     As Frodo was  borne towards them the great  pillars rose like towers to 
meet  him.  Giants  they  seemed  to  him,  vast  grey  figures  silent  but 
threatening. Then  he saw that they were  indeed shaped and  fashioned:  the 
craft and power  of  old had  wrought  upon them,  and  still they preserved 
through the suns and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which 
they  had been hewn. Upon great pedestals founded  in the deep  waters stood 
two great kings  of stone: still with blurred eyes and  crannied  brows they 
frowned upon  the North. The left hand of each  was raised  palm outwards in 
gesture of  warning;  in each  right  hand there  was an axe; upon each head 
there  was a crumbling helm  and crown. Great  power and majesty they  still 

####-wore, the silent wardens  of a long-vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon 
Frodo,  and he  cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to look up as 
the boat drew  near. Even Boromir bowed  his head  as  the boats whirled by. 
frail and  fleeting  as little  leaves,  under  the  enduring  shadow of the 
sentinels of N®menor. So they passed into the dark chasm of the Gates. 
     Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side. Far 
off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed 
over them.  Frodo crouching over his knees heard Sam in front  muttering and 
groaning: `What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of  this 
boat, and I'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! ' 
     `Fear  not! ' said a  strange voice behind him.  Frodo  turned and  saw 
Strider, and  yet  not Strider; for  the  weatherworn Ranger  was  no longer  
there.  In the  stern  sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding 
the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was 
blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes:  a king returning from exile to 
his own land. 
     'Fear not!  ' he said. `Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses 
of  Isildur and Anbrion, my sires of old.  Under  their shadow  Elessar, the 
Elfstone son of  Arathorn of the House  of  Valandil  Isildur's  son heir of 
Elendil, has nought to dread! ' 
     Then the light of  his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: `Would that 
Gandalf were  here! How my  heart yearns  for Minas Anor and the walls of my 
own city! But whither now shall I go? ' 
     The  chasm was long and  dark,  and filled  with the noise of wind  and 
rushing water and echoing stone. It  bent somewhat  towards the west so that 
at first all was dark  ahead; but soon Frodo  saw a tall gap of light before 
him,  ever  growing.  Swiftly it  drew  near,  and  suddenly the  boats shot 
through, out into a wide clear light. 
     The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy sky. 
The pent  waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale  Nen Hithoel, fenced 
by  steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees, but  their heads were 
bare,  cold-gleaming in  the sunlight. At  the far  southern end  rose three 
peaks.  The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered 
from 
them, an island  in the waters,  about  which   the flowing River  flung pale 
shimmering arms. Distant but deep there came up on the wind a  roaring sound 
like the roll of thunder heard far away. 

####-     `Behold Tol Brandir! ' said Aragorn,  pointing south to  the tall peak. 
'Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen the Hills of 
Hearing and of Sight. In the days  of the  great kings there were high seats 
upon  them, and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of  man or 
beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere  the shade of  night  falls we 
shall come to them. I hear the endless voice of Rauros calling.' 
     The Company rested now for a while,  drifting south on the current that 
flowed through the middle  of  the lake. They  ate  some food, and then they 
took  to their paddles and  hastened on their way. The sides of the westward 
hills fell into shadow, and  the Sun  grew round and  red.  Here and there a  
misty  star peered out. The three peaks loomed before  them, darkling in the 
twilight. Rauros was roaring with a grea t voice.  Already  night was laid on 
the flowing waters when the travellers came at  last under the shadow of the 
hills. 
     The tenth  day of their journey  was over.  Wilderland was behind them. 
They could go no further without choice between the  east -way and  the west. 
The last stage of the Quest was before them. 
 

####- 

Chapter 10. The Breaking of the Fellowship 

 
 
     Aragorn led them to  the right  arm of the River. Here upon its western 
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water from 
the feet of Amon Hen.  Behind it rose the first gentle  slopes  of  the hill 
clad with trees, and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of 
the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass.  
     'Here  we will rest tonight,' said Aragorn. `This is the lawn  of Parth 
Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope  that no evil has 
yet come here.' 
     They drew up their boats on the green banks, and  beside them they made  
their camp.  They set  a watch, but had no sight nor sound of their enemies.  
If Gollum had contrived  to follow  them,  he  remained  unseen and unheard. 
Nonetheless as the night  wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in  his 
sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn 
it was to watch. 
     `Why are you waking? ' asked Frodo. `It is not your watch.' 
     `I do  not know,' answered Aragorn; `but a shadow and a threat has been 
growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.' 
     `Why? ' said Frodo. `Are enemies at hand? ' 
     `Let us see what Sting may show,' answered Aragorn. 
     Frodo  then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the edges 
gleamed  dimly in  the night. `Orcs! ' he said. `Not very  near, and yet too 
near, it seems.' 
     `I feared as much,' said Aragorn. `But maybe they are  not on this side 
of the River. The light of  Sting is faint, and it may point to no more than 
spies of Mordor  roaming on the  slopes  of  Amon  Lhaw.  I have never heard 
before of Orcs  upon Amon Hen. Yet who  knows what may happen in  these 
evil 
days, now  that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of  Anduin.  
We must go warily tomorrow.' 
     The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black bars 
of cloud  like the fumes of a great burning. The  rising  sun  lit them from 
beneath  with flames of  murky red; but  soon  it climbed above  them into a  
clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with  gold. Frodo looked out 

####-eastward and  gazed at the tall island.  Its  si des  sprang sheer out of the 
running  water. High up above the  tall cliffs were  steep slopes upon which 
trees climbed, mounting  one  head above another; and  above them again were 
grey  faces of inaccessible rock, crowned by  a great spire  of  stone. Many 
birds were  circling  about it, but no sign of  other living things could be 
seen. 
     When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. `The  day has 
come at last,' he said: 'the day of choice which we have  long delayed. What 
shall  now become  of our Company that has  travelled  so far in fellowship?  
Shall we turn  west with  Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor; or turn east  
to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and 
that as each may choose? Whatever  we do  must  be done soon. We  cannot 
long 
halt here. The  enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I  fear that the 
Orcs may already be on this side of the water.' 
     There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved. 
     'Well,  Frodo,'  said Aragorn at last. `I fear that  the burden is laid 
upon  you. You are the  Bearer  appointed by the  Council. Your  own way you  
alone  can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and 
though I have tried to  bear his part, I do not know what design or hope  he 
had  for this hour,  if indeed he had any. Most  likely it seems that if  he 
were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.' 
     Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. `I  know that haste 
is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me an hour longer, 
and I will speak. Let me be alone! ' 
     Aragorn looked  at  him with  kindly  pity. `Very  well,  Frodo  son of 
Drogo,' he  said. `You shall have an hour, and  you  shall be alone. We will 
stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.' 
     Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had  been watching 
his master with  great  concern, shook his  head and  muttered:  'Plain as a  
pikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.' 
, 
     Presently Frodo  got  up and  walked away;  and Sam saw that  while the  
others restrained  themselves and did not stare at him,  the eyes of Boromir 
followed Frodo  intently, until he passed  out of sight in the  trees at the 
foot of Amon Hen. 
     Wandering  aimlessly at first in the  wood, Frodo found  that his  feet 

####-were leading  him up towards the  slopes of the hill. He came to a path, the 
dwindling ruins of a  road of long  ago. In steep places stairs of stone had 
been hewn,  but now they were  cracked  and worn, and split by the  roots of 
trees.  For some while he climbed, not caring which  way  he  went, until he 
came  to a  grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and  in the midst was a  
wide  flat stone.  The  little upland lawn  was  open upon the  East and was 
filled now with  the early  sunlight. Frodo halted  and looked  out over the 
River, far  below  him, to Tol  Brandir and the birds wheeling in the  great 
gulf of air between  him and the untrodden isle.  The voice of Rauros was  a  
mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom. 
     He  sat  down upon the stone  and cupped his chin in his hands, staring 
eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilbo 
left the Shire was passing through his mind,  and he  recalled and  pondered  
everything  that he could  remember  of Gandalf's words.  Time went on,  and 
still he was no nearer to a choice. 
     Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to him that 
something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon  him. He sprang  up 
and turned; but all that  he saw to his  surprise was Boromir, and his  face 
was smiling and kind. 
     `I was afraid for  you, Frodo,' he said, coming forward. `If Aragorn is 
right and Orcs are near,  then none of us should wander alone, and you least  
of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too  is heavy. May  I  stay now 
and talk for a  while,  since  I have found  you? It would comfort me. Where 
there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together  
may perhaps find wisdom.' 
     `You are kind,'  answered Frodo. 'But  I do not think  that  any speech 
will help me.  For  I know what I should do, but I  am  afraid of doing  it, 
Boromir: afraid.' 
     Boromir stood  silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in 
the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered. 
     Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. `Are you sure that you do not 
suffer needlessly? ' he said. `I wish to help you. You need counsel in  your 
hard choice. Will you not take mine? ' 
     'I  think I know already  what counsel you would  give, Boromir,'  said 
Frodo. 'And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart.' 
     `Warning? Warning against what? ' said Boromir sharply. 
     'Against  delay. Against the  way that seems easier. Against refusal of 

####-the  burden  that  is laid on me. Against -well,  if it must be said, against  
trust in the strength and truth of Men.' 
     `Yet that  strength has  long  protected you far  away  in  your little 
country, though you knew it not.' 
     'I do not doubt the valour of  your  people. But the world is changing. 
The  walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not strong enough. If 
they fail, what then? ' 
     'We shall fall in battle valiantly.  Yet there is still hope  that they 
will not fail.' 
     'No hope while the Ring lasts,' said Frodo. 
     'Ah! The Ring! '  said Boromir, his eyes lighting. 'The Ring! Is it not 
a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt  for so  small a  
thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an instant in the House 
of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? ' 
     Frodo looked  up. His heart went suddenly cold.  He caught the  strange 
gleam in  Boromir's eyes, yet his face was still kind  and friendly.  'It is 
best that it should lie hidden,' he answered. 
     'As you wish. I care  not,' said Boromir.  'Yet may I not even speak of 
it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands  of the Enemy:  
of  its evil  uses not  of its good.  The  world is changing, you say. Minas 
Tirith will fall,  if the Ring lasts. But why?  Certainly, if the  Ring were 
with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us? ' 
     'Were you not at the Council?  ' answered Frodo. `Because we cannot use  
it, and what is done with it turns to evil.' 
     Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. 'So you go  on,' he cried. 
'Gandalf, Elrond -- all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves 
they may be right. These  elves and half-elves and  wizards, they would come 
to grief perhaps.  Yet often I  doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. 
But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they  will  not be corrupted. We 
of Minas Tirith have been  staunch  through long years  of trial. We do  not 
desire  the  power  of  wizard-lords,  only  strength  to  defend ourselves, 
strength in a just cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the 
-Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad 
not to use it, to  use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the 
ruthless, these alone will  achieve victory.  What could not a warrior do in 
this  hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why 

####-not Boromir? The Ring would give  me power of Command. How I would 
drive the 
hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!' 
     Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly: Almost he seemed 
to have forgotten Frodo, while  his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the 
mustering  of  men;  and he drew  plans  for  great alliances  and  glorious 
victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself  a mighty king, 
benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms.  
     'And  they tell  us to throw it away!' he cried. `I do not sa y  destroy 
it. That might be  well, if  reason could show any hope of doing so. It does 
not. The only  plan that  is proposed  to us  is that a halfling should walk  
blindly into  Mordor and offer  the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for  
himself. Folly! 
     'Surely you see it, my friend?' he said, turning  now suddenly to Frodo 
again. `You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should  pardon 
you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?' 
     'No, I am afraid,' said Frodo.  'Simply  afraid. But I am glad  to have 
heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.' 
     `Then  you  will come to  Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir.  His eyes were 
shining and his face eager. 
     `You misunderstand me,' said Frodo. 
     'But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. 'My city 
is not far  now;  and it is little further  from  there to  Mordor than from 
here.  We have  been long in the  wilderness, and you need  news of what the 
Enemy is doing  before you make a move. Come with me, Frodo,' he  said. 
`You 
need  rest before your venture. if  go you must.' He laid  his  hand on  the 
hobbit's  shoulder in friendly fashion;  but Frodo  felt  the hand trembling 
with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the 
tall Man, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength. 
     `Why are you  so unfriendly? '  said Boromir. `I am a true man, neither  
thief nor tracker. I  need your Ring: that you know now; but  I give  you my  
word  that I do not  desire to keep it.  Will you not at least  let me  make 
trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring! ' 
     `No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.' 
     `It is by our own folly that the Enemy will  defeat us,' cried Boromir. 
`How it  angers  me!   Fool!  Obstinate fool!  Running wilfully to  death and 

####-ruining our cause.  If any mortals have claim  to the Ring, it is the men of 
N®menor, and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might 
have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me!  ' 
     Frodo  did not answer, but moved away  till the great  flat stone stood 
between them. `Come, come, my friend! ' said Boromir in a softer voice. 'Why 
not get rid of it? Why not be free of your  doubt and  fear? You can lay the 
blame on me, if you  will.  You  can say that I was too strong and took it by 
force. For I am  too strong for you, halfling,' he cried;  and  suddenly  he 
sprang  over the stone  and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face  was 
hideously changed; a raging fire was in his eyes. 
     Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There was only 
one thing he could do: trembling  he pulled  out the Ring upon its chain and 
quickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him  again.  The 
Man  gasped, stared for a  moment amazed, and then ran wildly about, seeking 
here and there among the rocks and trees. 
     'Miserable trickster!' he shouted. `Let me  get my  hands on you! Now I 
see your mind. You  will take the Ring  to Sauron and  sell us all. You have 
only waited  your  chance to  leave  us  in  the  lurch. Curse  you and  all 
halflings to death  and darkness! ' Then, catching his foot on  a stone,  he 
fell sprawling and  lay upon his face. For a while he was as still as if his 
own curse had struck him down; then suddenly he wept. 
     He rose and  passed  his  hand  over his eyes, dashing away  the tears.  
'What have I said? ' he cried. `What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! ' he called.  
'Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! ' 
     There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was  already 
far  away, leaping  blindly up  the path to the hill -top. Terror  and  grief 
shook  him, seeing in  his thought the  mad fierce face of Boromir,  and his 
burning eyes. 
     Soon  he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted,  gasping 
for breath. He saw as through a mist a  wide  flat circle, paved with mighty 
flags, and surrounded with  a crumbling battlement;  and in the middle,  set 
upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of many steps. 
Up  he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like  a lost  child that 
had clambered upon the throne of mountain-kings.  
     At first he could see little. He seemed  to be in a  world of  mist  in 
which  there were only shadows: the Ring  was upon him.  Then here and there 
the mist gave way and he saw  many visions: small and clear as if they  were 

####-under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only bright 
living images.  The world  seemed to have shrunk  and  fallen silent. He was 
sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men 
of  N®menor. Eastward he looked into  wide uncharted lands, nameless plains,  
and forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great  River lay like a 
ribbon beneath him, and the  Misty Mountains stood small and hard  as broken 
teeth. Westward he looked and saw  the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, 
the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below 
his very feet the  Great River curled  like a toppling wave and plunged over 
the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the 
fume. And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of 
sea -birds whirling like a white dust  in the  sun, and  beneath them a green 
and silver sea, rippling in endless lines.  
     But everywhere he looked he saw  the signs of  war. The Misty Mountains 
were  crawling  like anthills:  orcs were  issuing out  of a thousand holes.  
Under the  boughs of  Mirkwood there was  deadly strife of Elves and Men and 
fell  beasts. The  land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria; 
smoke rose on the borders of Lurien. 
     Horsemen  were  galloping on  the grass of  Rohan;  wolves poured  from  
Isengard. From the  havens of Harad ships of war  put out to sea; and out of 
the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon 
horses, 
chariots of chieftains  and laden wains. All  the power of the Dark Lord was 
in  motion. Then turning south  again  he  beheld Minas Tirith. Far away  it 
seemed. and beautiful: white-walled,  many-towered, proud  and fair upon its 
mountain-seat;  its battlements  glittered with  steel, and its turrets were 
bright with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith 
was  set  another  fortress,  greater and more  strong.  Thither,  eastward, 
unwilling his eye was drawn.  It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the 
grinning  gates of  Minas Morgul. and the  haunted Mountains, and it  looked 
upon Gorgoroth,  the  valley of terror  in the  Land  of Mordor. Darkness lay 
there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, 
and 
a  great  reek  rising.  Then at last  his  gaze was held: wall  upon  wall, 
battlement  upon  battlement, black, immeasurably strong,  mountain of iron, 
gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw  it: Barad-dyr,  Fortress of Sauron. 
All hope left him. 

####-     And suddenly he felt the  Eye. There was an eye  in the Dark Tower that 
did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze.  A fierce eager  
will  was there.  It leaped  towards him; almost  like a finger he  felt it, 
searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where 
he was. Amon  Lhaw it touched. It glanced  upon Tol Brandir he threw himself 
from the seat, crouching, covering his head with his grey hood. 
     He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily I  come, I 
come to  you? He could not tell. Then  as a flash  from some other point  of 
power there  came  to  his mind another thought: Take it off!  Take  it off! 
Fool, take it off! Take off the Ring! 
     The two powers strove in him. For a moment,  perfectly balanced between 
their piercing  points,  he  writhed,  tormented. Suddenly  he was aware  of 
himself  again. Frodo, neither  the  Voice nor the Eye: free to choose,  and 
with  one  remaining  instant in  which to  do so. He  took the Ring off his 
finger. He  was kneeling in clear  sunlight before  the  high  seat. A black  
shadow seemed to  pass like an arm above him; it  missed Amon Hen and 
groped 
out west,  and faded. Then all the sky was  clean and blue and birds sang in 
every tree. 
     Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him,  but his will was 
firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. `I  will do now what I 
must,' he said.  'This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at 
work even in the Company,  and the Ring must leave them before it  does more 
harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot  trust, and  those I  can trust are too 
dear  to me: poor old  Sam,  and Merry and  Pippin. Strider,  too: his heart 
yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen 
into evil. I will go alone. At once.' 
     He went quickly  down the path and came back to the lawn where  Boromir 
had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he could hear cries and  
calls from the woods near the shore below.  
     'They'll be hunting  for  me,' he  said. `I wonder how long I have been 
away. Hours, I should think.' He hesitated. 'What can  I  do? ' he muttered. 
'I must go now or I shall never go.  I shan't  get  a  chance  again. I hate 
leaving them, and like  this without  any explanation. But surely  they will 
understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?' 
     Slowly he  drew out the Ring and put it  on  once more. He vanished and  
passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind. 

####-     The others remained long by the river -side. For some time they had been 
silent, moving restlessly about; but now they  were sitting in a circle, and 
they  were talking. Every now  and again they made efforts to speak of other  
things,  of  their  long road and many  adventures;  they questioned Aragorn 
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient  history, and the remnants of 
its great works that could still be seen in this strange border -land  of the 
Emyn  Muil: the stone kings and  the  seats of Lhaw and Hen, and  the  great 
Stair  beside  the falls  of  Rauros. But always  their  thoughts  and words 
strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose  to do? Why  
was 
he hesitating?  
     `He is  debating  which course  is  the most desperate, I think,'  said 
Aragorn. 'And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for the Company 
to  go east, since we have  been tracked by Gollum,  and  must fear that the 
secret of our journey is already betrayed.  But Minas Tirith is no nearer to 
the Fire and the destruction of the Burden. 
     `We may remain there for a while  and make  a brave stand; but the Lord 
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond  said was beyond 
his power: either to keep the Burden  secret. or to hold  off the full might 
of the Enemy when he comes  to take it.  Which way would any of us choose in 
Frodo's place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.' 
     'Grievous is our loss,'  said Legolas.  'Yet we must needs make up  our 
minds without his aid.  Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call 
him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.' 
     `And so should I,'  said Gimli. 'We, of course, were only sent  to help 
the  Bearer along the  road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us 
is under any oath or  command to  seek Mount Doom.  Hard was my parting 
from 
Lothlurien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we  have reached the 
last  choice, it  is clear to  me that I  cannot leave Frodo. I would choose 
Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.' 
     `And I  too will go with him,' said Legolas. `It would be faithless now 
to say farewell.' 
     'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,' said Aragorn. 'But 
if  he goes east,  then all need not go  with him; nor  do I think that  all 
should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two, 
or  one alone.  If  you  would let me choose,  then  I should  appoint three 

####-companions:  Sam, who  could not  bear it otherwise; and  Gimli; and myself.  
Boromir  will return to his own city,  where his father and his  people need 
him; and with him the others should go, or at  least Meriadoc  and Peregrin , 
if Legolas is not willing to leave us.' 
     `That won't do at all! ' cried Merry. 'We can't leave Frodo! Pippin and 
I  always intended to go wherever he went,  and we still  do. But we did not 
realize what that would mean. It  seemed different so far away, in the Shire 
or in Rivendell. It  would  be mad and cruel to let Frodo go  to Mordor. Why  
can't we stop him?' 
     'We must stop  him,'  said Pippin.  `And  that is what  he  is worrying 
about, I am sure. He knows we shan't agree to his going east. And  he doesn't  
like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to 
Mordor  alone! ' Pippin shuddered. 'But the dear silly  old hobbit, he ought 
to know that he  hasn't got to ask.  He ought  to know that if we can't stop 
him, we shan't leave him.' 
     'Begging  your  pardon,'  said  Sam. 'I don't  think you understand  my 
master  at all.  He isn't hesitating about which way  to  go. Of course not! 
What's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your 
pardon, 
Master Boromir,' he added, and turned. It was then that they discovered that 
Boromir, who at first had been sitting silent on  the outside of the circle, 
was no longer there. 
     `Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried.  'He's been a bit 
queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's  not in this business. He's off to 
his  home, as he always said;  and no blame to  him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows 
he's got to find the Cracks of Doom,  if  he can. But he's  afraid . Now it's 
come to the point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of 
course  he's had  a bit of schooling, so to speak-we  all have-since we left 
home, or  he'd be so terrified he'd just  fling  the Ring in the  River  and 
bolt. But he's still too frightened to start. And he isn't worrying about us 
either: whether we'll  go along with him or no. He knows we mean to.  That's 
another thing that's  bothering  him. If  he  screws himself up to go, he'll 
want to go alone. Mark my words!  We're going to  have trouble when he 
comes 
back. For he'll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name's Baggins.' 
     'I believe  you speak more  wisely than any of us,  Sam,' said Aragorn. 
`And what shall we do, if you prove right? ' 

####-     'Stop him! Don't let him go! ' cried Pippin. 
     'I wonder?  '  said Aragorn.  `He is  the Bearer, and  the fate  of the 
Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one way or 
the  other. Nor  do I  think that we  should succeed, if we tried. There are 
other powers at work far stronger.' 
     `Well, I wish  Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back. and let us 
get it over,' said Pippin. `This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up?  
' 
     `Yes,' said Aragorn. 'The hour  is long passed. The morning is  wearing 
away. We must call for him.' 
     At  that  moment Boromir  reappeared.  He  came out from the  trees and 
walked  towards them  without speaking.  His  face  looked grim and sad.  He 
paused as if counting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with 
his eyes on the ground. 
     `Where have you been, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. `Have you seen Frodo? ' 
     Boromir hesitated for  a second.  `Yes,  and no,'  he  answered slowly. 
`Yes: I found him some way up the hill,  and I spoke to  him. I urged him to  
come to  Minas Tirith and  not to go  east. I grew angry and he  left me. He 
vanished. I have  never seen such a thing happen before. though I have heard 
of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not  find him again. I 
thought he would return to you.' 
     'Is that all that you have to say? ' said Aragorn, looking hard and not 
too kindly at Boromir. 
     `Yes,' he answered. `I will say no more yet.' 
     `This is  bad!' cried Sam, jumping up. `I don't know  what this Man has 
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put  the thing on? He didn't ought to have; 
and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!' 
     'But he wouldn't keep it on`' said Merry. `Not when he had  escaped the 
unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.' 
     `But where did he go? Where is he? ' cried Pippin. 'He's been away ages 
now.' 
     `How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. 
     `Half  an hour, maybe,' he answered.  `Or it  might be an hour. I  have 
wandered for  some time since.  I do not  know! I do not know! ' He  put his 
head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.  
     `An hour since he vanished! ' shouted Sam. `We must try and find him at 
once. Come on! ' 

####-     `Wait  a moment!  ' cried Aragorn. `We must  divide up into pairs,  and 
arrange-here, hold on! Wait! ' 
     It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed  off  first. 
Merry  and Pippin  had followed, and were already disappearing westward into 
the trees  by  the  shore,  shouting:  Frodo! Frodo!  in  their clear,  high 
hobbit-voices. Legolas and  Gimli were running.  A  sudden  panic or madness 
seemed to have fallen on the Company. 
     `We  shall all be scattered and lost,' groaned Aragorn. `Boromir!  I do 
not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help  now! Go after 
those  two  young hobbits,  and guard them at  the least, even if you cannot 
find Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I 
shall return soon.' 
     Aragorn  sprang swiftly away and  went in pursuit of  Sam. Just  as  he 
reached the  little lawn among the rowans  he  overtook him, toiling uphill, 
panting and calling, Frodo! 
     `Come with me, Sam! '  he said.  `None of us should be alone.  There is 
mischief about. I feel it.  I am going to the top, to  the Seat of Amon Hen, 
to  see what may be   seen. And look! It is  as  my heart guessed, Frodo went  
this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path. 
     Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, and 
soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead. 
Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head. 
     `Whoa,  Sam  Gamgee! ' he said aloud. `Your legs are too short, so  use 
your head! Let me  see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not  his way; but he 
hasn't  told  us everything. Something scared Mr.  Frodo  badly.  He screwed 
himself up  to the point,  sudden. He made up his mind  at last to go. Where 
to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel 
hard.' 
     Sam passed his hand over  his eyes, brushing  away the  tears. 'Steady, 
Gamgee!  ' he said. `Think,  if you can!  He can't fly across rivers, and he 
can't  jump  waterfalls. He's got no gear. So he's  got  to get back to  the 
boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning!  ' 
     Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Up 
he  got and ran on.  He  came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen  by the 
shore, where the boats were  drawn up out  of the  water.  No one was there.  
There  seemed to be cries in  the woods behind, but he did not heed them. He 
stood gazing for a moment. stock -still, gaping.  A boat was sliding down the 

####-bank  all by itself.  With  a shout Sam raced  across  the  grass. The  boat 
slipped into the wat 
 
128d 
 
er. 
     `Coming, Mr. Frodo!  Coming! ' called  Sam, and flung himself  from the 
bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a  yard. With  a  cry 
and a  splash he fell face  downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went 
under, and the River closed over his curly head. 
     An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and 
the boat put about. Frodo was  just  in time to grasp Sam by  the hair as he 
came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.  
     `Up you come, Sam my lad! ' said Frodo. `Now take my hand! ' 
     `Save me, Mr. Frodo! ' gasped Sam.  `I'm  drownded.  I can't  see  your 
hand.' 
     `Here it is. Don't  pinch, lad! I  won't  let you  go. Tread water  and 
don't flounder, or  you'll upset the boat. There now, get hold of  the side, 
and let me use the paddle! ' 
     With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank. and Sam was 
able to scramble out, wet  as a  water -rat.  Frodo  took off  the  Ring  and 
stepped ashore again. 
     `Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam! ' he said. 
     'Oh, Mr. Frodo, that's hard! ' said Sam shivering. `That's hard, trying 
to  go without me and all. If I hadn't a guessed right, where  would you  be 
now?  ' 
     `Safely on my way.' 
     `Safely! ' said Sam. `All alone and without me to help you? I  couldn't  
have a borne it, it'd have been the death of me.' 
     'It would be the death of you to come  with me, Sam,' said  Frodo and I 
could not have borne that.' 
     `Not as certain as being left behind,' said Sam. 
     `But I am going to Mordor.' 
     `I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course  you are. And I'm coming 
with you.' 
     `Now, Sam,'  said Frodo, `don't  hinder me!  The  others will be coming 
back  at any  minute.  If  they  ca tch me here. I  shall have  to argue  and 

####-explain, and I shall never have  the heart  or  the chance to get off. But I 
must go at once. It's the only way.' 
     `Of course  it is,' answered  Sam.  'But not alone. I'm  coming too, or  
neither of us isn't going. I'll knock holes in all the boats first.' 
     Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched his heart. 
`Leave one! 'he said. `We'll need it. But you  can't come like  this without 
your gear or food or anything.' 
     'Just  hold on a moment, and  I'll  get my stuff!' cried  Sam  eagerly. 
'It's all ready. I thought we should be off today.' He rushed to the camping 
place,  fished out  his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it  when  he 
emptied the boat of his companions' goods grabbed a  spare blanket, and some 
extra packages of food, and ran back. 
     `So all my  plan is spoilt!  ' said Frodo.  `It is  no good  trying  to 
escape you. But I'm glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is 
plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find 
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them 
again.' 
     `Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,' said Sam. 
     So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo 
paddled away from the shore, and the River  bore them swiftly away. down the 
western arm, and past  the frowning cliffs  of Tol  Brandir. The roar of the 
great falls drew nearer. Even with such help  as Sam could give, it was hard 
work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive 
the boat eastward towards the far shore. 
     At  length  they  came to land  again  upon the southern slopes of Amon 
Lhaw. There  they found a shelving shore, and they  drew the  boat out, high 
above the water ,  and hid it as well  as  they could behind a great boulder. 
Then  shouldering their  burdens,  they set off, seeking a  path  that would  
bring them over  the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and  down into the Land of 
Shadow. 
  

####-     
Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring. 
     The second part is called THE TWO TOWERS, since the events recounted 
in it are dominated by ORTHANC,  the citadel  of  Saruman, and  the fortress 
of MINAS MORGUL  that guards the secret entrance  to Mordor;  it  tells  of 
the deeds and  perils of  all  the members of the now sundered fellowship, until 
the coming of the Great Darkness. 
     The  third part tells of the  last defence against the Shadow,  and the 
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in  THE RETURN OF THE KING. 
 

####-####- 

 
 

 * BOOK III *  

Chapter 1. The Departure of Boromir 

 
 
     Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the ground. 
Hobbits go light, and  their  footprints are not  easy  even for a Ranger to 
read, but not  far from the top a spring  crossed  the path, and in the  wet 
earth he saw what he was seeking. 
     'I read the  signs  aright,'  he  said  to himself. 'Frodo  ran  to the 
hill-top. I wonder what he  saw there? But he returned by  the same way, and 
went down the hill again.' 
     Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, hoping to 
see there something that  would guide him in his perplexities; but  time was 
pressing. Suddenly he leaped  forward, and  ran to the  summit,  across  the 
great flag-stones, and up the steps. Then sitting in the high seat he looked 
out. But the  sun seemed darkened,  and the world dim and remote.  He turned 
from the North back again to North, and saw nothing save  the distant hills,  
unless it were  that far away he could see again  a great bird like an eagle 
high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth. 
     Even as he  gazed his  quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands below,  
on the west  side  of the River. He stiffened.  There were  cries, and among 
them, to  his  horror, he  could distinguish the harsh voices of  Orcs. Then 
suddenly with  a deep-throated call a great horn blew, and the  blasts of it 
smote the hills and  echoed  in the hollows, rising  in a mighty shout above 
the roaring of the falls. 
     'The horn of  Boromir!' he cried. 'He is  in need!' He  sprang down the 
steps and away, leaping down the path. 'Alas! An ill fate is on me this day, 
and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?' 
     As he ran the cries  came louder, but fainter  now and  desperately the 
horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs, and suddenly 
the horn-calls  ceased.  Aragorn  raced  down the last slope,  but before he 
could reach  the hill's foot, the sounds died away;  and as he turned to the 
left and ran towards them  they  retreated, until at last he could hear them 
no more. Drawing  his bright sword and crying Elendil!  Elendil!  he crashed 
through the trees.  

####-     A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the lake 
he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back to a great tree, as if he was 
resting.  But  Aragorn saw  that he was pierced  with  many  black -feathered 
arrows; his sword  was still in his hand, but it  was  broken near the hilt; 
his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many Orcs lay slain, piled all about 
him and at his feet. 
     Aragorn knelt beside him.  Boromir opened his eyes and strove to speak. 
At last slow  words came. 'I tried to take the Ring from Frodo ' he said. 'I  
am sorry. I have paid.' His glance strayed to his fallen enemies;  twenty at 
least lay there. 'They have gone: the Halflings: the Orcs have taken them. I 
think they  are  not  dead. Orcs bound them.' He paused and  his eyes closed 
wearily. After a moment he spoke again. 
     'Farewell, Aragorn!  Go to  M inas Tirith  and  save my  people!  I have 
failed.' 
     'No!'  said  Aragorn,  taking his hand and kissing  his brow. 'You have 
conquered. Few  have gained such a  victory. Be at peace! Minas Tirith shall  
not fall!' 
     Boromir smiled. 
     'Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?' said Aragorn. 
     But Boromir did not speak again. 
     'Alas!' said  Aragorn. 'Thus  passes the  heir of Denethor, Lord of the 
Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all  in ruin. It is 
I that  have failed. Vain was Gandalf's  trust in me.  What  shall I do now?  
Boromir has laid it on  me  to go  to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it; 
but where are the  Ring and the Bearer? How shall I  find them  and save the  
Quest from disaster?' 
     He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir's hand. 
So it  was  that Legolas  and  Gimli  found him.  They came from the western 
slopes of the hill, silently, creeping  through  the  trees as if  they were 
hunting. Gimli had  his axe in hand,  and  Legola s  his long knife:  all his 
arrows were spent. When  they came into the  glade they halted in amazement; 
and  then they stood a moment with heads bowed  in  grief,  for it seemed to 
them plain what had happened. 
     'Alas!'  said Legolas, coming to  Aragorn's  side. 'We have  hunted and 
slain many  Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more use  here. We 
came when we heard the horn-but too late, it  seems. I  fear  you have taken 
deadly hurt.' 

####-     'Boromir  is dead,' said Aragorn. 'I am unscathed,  for  I was not here 
with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.' 
     'The hobbits!' cried Gimli 'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?' 
     'I do not know,' answered Aragorn wearily. 'Before he died Boromir told 
me that the Orcs had  bound them;  he  did not think that they were  dead. I 
sent him  to follow  Merry and Pippin; but I did not ask him if Frodo or Sam 
were with him: not until it was too  late.  All  that I have done  today has 
gone amiss. What is to be done now?' 
     'First  we must tend the fallen,'  said Legolas. 'We  cannot  leave him 
lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.' 
     'But we must be swift,' said Gimli. 'He would not wish us to linger. We 
must follow the Orcs, if there is hope  that  any of our Company are  living 
prisoners.' 
     'But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them  or not ' said 
Aragorn.  'Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him first? An evil choice 
is now before us!' 
     'Then let us do first what we must do,' said  Legolas. 'We have not the 
time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A 
cairn we might build.' 
     'The labour would be hard and long:  there are no stones that we  could 
use nearer than the water -side,' said Gimli. 
     'Then  let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his 
vanquished foes,' said Aragorn. 'We will send him to the Falls of Rauros and  
give him to Anduin. The River of Gondor will take care at least that no evil 
creature dishonours his bones.' 
     Quickly  they searched the bodies of  the Orcs, gathering  their swords 
and cloven helms and shields into  a  heap. 'See!' cried  Aragorn. 'Here  we 
find  tokens!' He picked  out  from the  pile  of grim weapons  two  knives,  
leaf-bladed, damasked  in go ld and red;  and searching further he found also 
the sheaths,  black, set with small red gems. 'No orc-tools these!' he said. 
'They were  borne by  the hobbits.  Doubtless the  Orcs despoiled them,  but 
feared  to keep  the knives,  knowing  them  for  wha t  they  are:  work  of 
Westernesse, wound about with spells  for the  bane of Mordor. Well, now, if 
they still  live,  our  friends are  weaponless. I will  take these  things,  
hoping against hope, to give them back.' 
     'And  I,' said Legolas,  'will take all the arrows that I can find, for  
my quiver is empty.' He  searched  in the  pile  and on the ground about and 

####-found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft than such arrows 
as the Orcs were accustomed to use. He looked at them closely. 
     And  Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: 'Here  lie many that are 
not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, from the Misty  Mountains, if I 
know  anything of Orcs and their kinds.  And here are others  strange to me.  
Their gear is not after the manner of Orcs at all!' 
     There were four goblin-soldiers of greater  stature, swart, slant-eyed, 
with thick  legs and  large hands. They  were armed with short  broad-bladed 
swords, not with  the curved scimitars usual with Orcs: and they had bows  of 
yew, in length and shape like the bows of Men.  Upon their shields they bore 
a strange device: a small white hand in the centre of a black field; on  the 
front of their iron helms was set an S-rune, wrought of some white metal. 
     'I have not seen  these tokens  before,'  said Aragorn.  'What  do they 
mean?' 
     'S is for Sauron,' said Gimli. 'That is easy to read.' 
     'Nay!' said Legolas. 'Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.' 
     'Neither  does he  use  his right name,  nor permit it  to be  spelt or 
spoken,' said Aragorn. 'And he does  not use white. The  Orcs in the service 
of Barad-dyr use the sign of the Red Eye.' He stood for a moment in thought. 
'S is for Saruman, I  guess,'  he  said at length. 'There  is evil afoot  in 
Isengard,  and the West is no longer safe. It is  as Gandalf feared: by some 
means the traitor Saruman has had news of our journey. It is likely too that 
he  knows  of  Gandalf's  fall.  Pursuers  from Moria may  have escaped  the 
vigilance of Lurien, or they may have avoided that land and come to Isengard 
by other  paths. Orcs travel  fast.  But  Saruman has many  ways of learning 
news. Do you remember the birds?' 
     'Well,  we  have no time to ponder riddles,' said  Gimli. 'Let us  bear 
Boromir away!' 
     'But  after that  we  must guess  the riddles, if we  are to choose our 
course rightly,' answered Aragorn. 
     'Maybe there is no right choice,' said Gimli. 
     Taking his axe the  Dwarf now  cut  several branches. These they lashed 
together with bowstrings, and spread their  cloaks upon the frame. Upon this 
rough bier they carried the  body of  their companion to the shore, together  
with such trophies of  his last battle as they chose to send forth with him. 
It was only a short way, yet they found it no easy task, for  Boromir was  a  
man both tall and strong. 

####-     At the water -side Aragorn  remained, watching the  bier. while  Legolas 
and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth  Galen. It was  a mile or more, and 
it was some time before they came back, paddling two boats swiftly along the 
shore. 
     'There is a strange tale  to tell!'  said Legolas. 'There are  only two 
boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.' 
     'Have Orcs been there?' asked Aragorn. 
     'We saw no signs of  them,' answered Gimli. 'And Orcs  would have taken 
or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.' 
     'I will look at the ground when we come there,' said Aragorn. 
     Now they laid  Boromir  in the middle of the boat that  was to bear him 
away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed beneath his head. 
They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it upon his shoulders. The golden 
belt of Lurien gleamed  about  his waist. His helm they set beside  him, and 
across  his lap  they laid the  cloven horn and  the hilts and shards of his 
sword; beneath his  feet  they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening  
the  prow to the stern of the other boat,  they drew him out into the water. 
They rowed sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift -running channel 
they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The steep  sides of  Tol Brandir  
were  glowing:  it  was now  mid-afternoon.  As they  went south the fume of 
Rauros rose and  shimmered before them, a haze of gold. The rush and thunder 
of the falls shook the windless air . 
     Sorrowfully  they  cast loose  the funeral  boat:  there  Boromir  lay, 
restful, peaceful, gliding upon  the bosom of the  flowing water. The stream 
took him while they  held their own boat back with their paddles. He floated 
by  them, and slowly  his  boat departed, waning to  a dark spot against the 
golden  light;  and then suddenly it vanished. Rauros  roared on unchanging. 
The River  had taken Boromir  son of Denethor,  and he was not seen again in 
Minas  Tirith,  standing as he used to  stand  upon  the  White Tower in the 
morning. But  in Gondor in after -days it long  was said that  the elven-boat 
rode  the falls  and the foaming pool, and bore him down  through Osgiliath, 
and  past the many mouths of Anduin, out  into the Great Sea at night  under  
the stars. 
     For a  while  the three companions remained  silent,  gazing after him. 
Then  Aragorn spoke. 'They will look for him from the White Tower,' he said, 
'but he will not return from mountain or from  sea.' Then slowly he began to 
sing: 

####-     Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows 
     The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes. 
     'What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to me tonight?  
     Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?' 
     'I saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and grey; 
     I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away 
     Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more. 
     The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of Denethor.'  
     'O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar, 
     But you came not from the empty lands where no men are.'  
      
Then Legolas sang: 
 
     From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies, from the sandhills and the stones; 
     The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans. 
     'What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me at eve? 
     Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve.'  
     'Ask not of me where he doth dwell-so many bones there lie 
     On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky; 
     So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea. 
     Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to me!'  
     'O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south, 
     But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea's mouth.'  
     Then Aragorn sang again: 
     From the  Gate  of Kings  the  North Wind rides,  and past the  roaring falls;  
     And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls. 
     'What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me today? 
     What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away.'  
     'Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he fought. 
     His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water brought. 
     His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest; 
     And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon its breast.'  
     'O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze 
     To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end o f days.'  
 
     So they ended. Then they  turned  their boat and drove it with all  the 
speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen. 
     'You left the  East Wind to  me,' said Gimli, 'but I will say naught of 
it.' 
     'That is as it should be,' said Aragorn. 'In  Minas Tirith  they endure 
the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boromir has taken 

####-his road. and we must make haste to choose our own.' 
     He surveyed the green  lawn, quickly but  thoroughly, stooping often to 
the earth. 'The Orcs have been on this ground,' he  said. 'Otherwise nothing 
can be made  out for certain. All  our  footprints  are  here, crossing  and 
re-crossing. I cannot  tell  whether any of the hobbits have come back since 
the search for  Frodo  began.'  He returned  to the bank, close to where the 
rill  from the  spring  trickled  out into  the River. 'There are some clear 
prints here,' he  said. 'A hobbit waded out into the water and  back; but  I 
cannot say how long ago.' 
     'How then do you read this riddle?' asked Gimli. 
     Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the  camping-place and 
looked  at  the baggage. 'Two  packs  are  missing.' he  said, 'and  one  is 
certainly Sam's:  it was rather large and heavy.  This  then  is the answe r: 
Frodo  has gone by boat, and his servant has  gone with him. Frodo must have 
returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to 
follow me;  but plainly he  did  not do so. He guessed his master s mind and  
came  back here before Frodo had gone. He did  not find it easy to leave Sam 
behind!' 
     'But why should  he leave  us behind, and without  a word?' said Gimli. 
'That was a strange deed!' 
     'And a  brave deed,' said Aragorn. 'Sam was right,  I think.  Frodo did 
not wish to  lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he knew that he 
must go himself. Something happened after he left us that  overcame his fear 
and doubt.' 
     'Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he fled,' said Legolas.  
     'He fled, certainly,' said Aragorn, 'but not, I think, from Orcs.' What 
he  thought was  the cause of Frodo's  sudden resolve and flight Aragorn did  
not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret. 
     'Well,  so much  at  least  is now clear,'  said Legolas:  'Frodo is no 
longer on this side of the  River:  only he can have taken the boat. And Sam 
is with him; only he would have taken his pack.' 
     'Our  choice then,' said Gimli, 'is either to take the  remaining  boat 
and follow Frodo, or else to follow  the Orcs on foot. There is little  hope 
either way. We have already lost precious hours.' 
     'Let me  think!' said Aragorn. 'And now  may I make a  right choice and 
change the  evil fate of this unhappy day!' He stood silent for a moment. 'I  
will follow the Orcs,' he said at last. 'I would have guided Frodo to Mordor  

####-and  gone with  him to the end; but if I  seek him now  in the wilderness, I 
must abandon the captives to torment  and death.  My heart speaks clearly at 
last: the fate  of the Bearer  is in  my  hands no  longer .  The Company has 
played  its part. Yet we that  remain cannot forsake our companions while we 
have strength left.  Come!  We  will go  now. Leave  all  that can be spared 
behind! We will press on by day and dark!' 
     They drew up the  last  boat  and carried  it to  the trees.  They laid 
beneath  it such of their goods  as  they did not  need  and could not carry 
away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading as they came back  
to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they picked up the trail of the 
Orcs. It needed little skill to find. 
     'No other folk  make such  a trampling,' said Legolas. 'It seems  their 
delight to slash and beat down  growing  things that are not even  in  their 
way.' 
     'But they go with a great  speed for all that,' said Aragorn, 'and they 
do not  tire. And later we  may have  to  search for our  path  in hard bare 
lands.' 
     'Well, after  them!' said Gimli. 'Dwarves too can  go swiftly, and they 
do not tire sooner  than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they have a long 
start.' 
     'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'we  shall all need the endurance of  Dwarves. But 
come! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of our enemies. And 
woe to them, if we prove the swifter! We  will make such a chase as shall be  
accounted a marvel among the Three Kindreds µ Elves. Dwarves, and Men. 
Forth 
the Three Hunters!' 
     Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and on he led 
them,  tireless and swift, now that his mind  was at last made up. The woods 
about the lake they left behind. Long slopes  they climbed, dark, hard-edged 
against the  sky already red with sunset. Dusk came. They passed away,  grey 
shadows in a stony land. 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Riders of Rohan 

 
 
     Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and  brooded 
on  the pale margins of the Anduin, but the  sky was clear. Stars  came out. 
The waxing  moon  was riding in the West, and the shadows of the rocks  were 
black. They had come to  the feet of stony hills, and their pace was slower, 
for the trail was no longer easy to  follow. Here the highlands of the  Emyn 
Muil ran from North to South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of 
each ridge was steep  and difficult, but  the  eastward slopes were gentler, 
furrowed  with  many  gullies  and  narrow  ravines.  All  night  the  three 
companions scrambled in  this bony land, climbing to the  crest of the first  
and tallest ridge, and down again into the darkness of a deep winding valley 
on the other side. 
     There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief space. 
The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glittered above them; the 
first light  of day had not  yet come over the dark  hills behind.  For  the 
moment Aragorn was at a loss:  the  orc-trail had descended into the valley, 
but there it had vanished. 
     'Which way would they turn, do you  think?' said Legolas. 'Northward to 
take a straighter road to Isengard,  or Fangorn, if that is their aim as you  
guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?' 
     'They will not make  for  the  river,  whatever mark they aim at'' said 
Aragorn. 'And unless there is much amiss  in Rohan and  the power of Saruman 
is greatly increased;  they will take  the  shortest way that they  can find 
over the fields of the Rohirrim. Let us search northwards!' 
     The  dale  ran like  a stony  trough between  the  ridged  hills, and a  
trickling stream flowed among the boulders  at the  bottom. A cliff  frowned 
upon their right; to their left rose  grey  slopes, dim  and shadowy in  the 
late night.  They  went  on  for  a  mile  or  more northwards. Aragorn  was 
searching. bent towards  the ground,  among the folds and gullies leading up 
into  the western ridge. Legolas was some way ahead. Suddenly the Elf gave a  
cry and the others came running towards him. 
     'We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting,' he said. 
'Look!' He pointed, and they saw that  what they had  at  first  taken to be 
boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled  bodies. Five dead Orcs 

####-lay there. They had  been hewn  with many  cruel strokes, and  two had  been 
beheaded. The ground was wet with their dark blood. 
     'Here is another riddle!' said Gimli.  'But it needs the light  of  day 
and for that we cannot wait.' 
     'Yet however you  read it,  it  seems  not  unhopeful,'  said  Legolas.  
'Enemies  of the  Orcs  are  likely to  be our friends. Do any folk dwell in 
these hills?' 
     'No,' said Aragorn. 'The Rohirrim seldom come  here, and it is far from 
Minas Tirith. It might be that some  company of  Men  were  hunting here for 
reasons that we do not know. Yet I think not.' 
     'What do you think?' said Gimli. 
     'I think that  the  enemy  brought his  own enemy  with  him,' answered 
Aragorn. 'These are Northern Orcs from far away. Among the slain are none of 
the great  Orcs with the strange badges. There was a quarrel, I guess: it is 
no uncommon thing with these foul  folk. Maybe there was some  dispute about 
the road.' 
     'Or about the  captives,' said  Gimli. 'Let us hope that they, too, did 
not meet their end here.' 
     Aragorn  searched the ground in a wide  circle,  but no other traces of 
the fight could be found. They went on. Already the eastward sky was turning 
pale; the  stars were fading, and a grey light was  slowly growing. A little 
further  north they  came  to  a fold  in which a tiny stream,  falling  and 
winding, had cut a stony path down into  the valley. In it some bushes grew,  
and there were patches of grass upon its sides. 
     'At last!'  said Aragorn.  'Here are  the tracks that  we seek! Up this 
water -channel: this is the way that the Orcs went after their debate.' 
     Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path.  As if fresh 
from a  night's rest they sprang  from stone to stone. At last  they reached 
the  crest of  the  grey hill,  and a  sudden breeze blew in  their hair and 
stirred their cloaks: the chill wind of dawn. 
     Turning  back they saw across  the  River  the  far hills kindled.  Day 
leaped into the sky. The red rim of the  sun rose over  the shoulders of the 
dark  land. Before them in the West the world lay still, formless  and grey; 
but even  as they looked,  the shadows of night melted, the  colours  of the 
waking earth returned: green flowed over the wide meads  of Rohan; the white 
mists shimmered in  the watervales;  and far off to the left, thirty leagues 
or more, blue  and purple stood the  White Mountains,  rising  into peaks of 

####-jet, tipped with glimmering snows, flushed with the rose of morning. 
     'Gondor! Gondor!' cried  Aragorn. 'Would that I looked on  you again in 
happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your bright streams.  
     Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea! 
     West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree 
     Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old. 
     O proud walls! White towers! O winged crown and throne of gold! 
     O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree, 
     Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea?  
     Now  let  us go!' he said , drawing his  eyes away from  the South,  and 
looking out west and north to the way that he must tread. 
     The ridge upon  which the companions  stood  went down  steeply  before 
their feet. Below it twenty  fathoms or  more, there was  a wide and  rugged 
shelf which ended suddenly in the brink  of a sheer  cliff: the East Wall of 
Rohan.  So  ended  the  Emyn Muil, and  the  green plains  of  the  Rohirrim 
stretched away before them to the edge of sight. 
     'Look!' cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them. 'There 
is the eagle  again! He is very high. He seems  to be flying now away,  from 
this land back to the North. He is going with great speed. Look!' 
     'No, not even my eyes can  see him, my good Legolas,' said Aragorn. 'He 
must  be far aloft indeed. I wonder  what  is his errand, if he is the  same 
bird that I have seen before. But look! I  can  see something nearer at hand 
and more urgent; there is something moving over the plain!' 
     'Many  things,'  said  Legolas. 'It is a great company on foot;  but  I 
cannot  say  more,  nor see what kind of folk they  may  be. They  are  many 
leagues  away: twelve,  I  guess; but  the flatness of the plain is hard  to 
measure.' 
     'I think,  nonetheless, that we no longer  need any  trail  to  tell us 
which  way  to go,' said Gimli. 'Let  us find a path down to  the  fields as 
quick as may be.' 
     'I  doubt  if you will  find a path quicker  than the one that the Orcs 
chose,' said Aragorn. 
     They  followed their enemies now  by the clear light  of day. It seemed 
that the Orcs had  pressed on with all possible speed. Every  now  and again 
the pursuers found things that had been dropped or cast away: food-bags, the 
rinds and crusts of hard grey bread. a torn black cloak, a heavy iron-nailed 
shoe  broken on the stones. The trail  led them  north along the top  of the 

####-escarpment, and at length they  came to a deep cleft carved in the rock by a  
stream  that  splashed  noisily down.  In the  narrow  ravine  a rough  path 
descended like a steep stair into the plain. 
     At  the bottom  they came with  a strange  suddenness  on the grass  of 
Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Emyn Muil. The 
falling stream vanished into a deep growth of cresses and water -plants,  and  
they could  hear it tinkling away in green tunnels, down long gentle  slopes 
towards the fens of Entwash Vale far  away.  They seemed to have left winter  
clinging  to  the  hills  behind. Here  the air was softer  and warmer,  and 
faintly  scented,  as if spring was already stirring and the sap was flowing 
again in  herb and leaf. Legolas took a deep breath,  like one that drinks a  
great draught after long thirst in barren places. 
     'Ah!  the green smell!'  he said. 'It is better than much sleep. Let us 
run! ' 
     'Light feet may run swiftly here,' said Aragorn.  'More swiftly, maybe, 
than iron-shod Orcs. Now we have a chance to lessen their lead!' 
     They went in single file, running like hounds on a strong scent, and an 
eager  light was  in their eyes.  Nearly due  west the  broad  swath  of the 
marching Orcs  tramped  its  ugly slot;  the sweet  grass of  Rohan had been 
bruised and  blackened as  they  passed. Presently  Aragorn  gave a cry  and  
turned aside. 'Stay!' he shouted. 'Do not follow me yet!'  He ran quickly to 
the right, away  from the  main trail; for he had seen  footprints that went 
that way, branching off  from the  others,  the  marks of small unshod feet. 
These, however, did  not go far before they were crossed by orc-prints, also 
coming out  from the main  trail behind and in  front, and then  they curved 
sharply back  again  and were lost  in the  trampling. At the furthest point 
Aragorn stooped and picked up something from the grass; then he ran back. 
     'Yes,' he said, 'they are quite plain:  a hobbit's footprints. Pippin's 
I think. He is smaller than the other. And look at this! He held up a  thing 
that glittered in  the sunlight. It  looked  like  the new-opened leaf of  a  
beech-tree, fair and strange in that treeless plain. 
     'The brooch of an elven-cloak!' cried Legolas and Gimli together. 
     'Not idly do the leaves of Lurien  fall,' said  Aragorn.  'This did not 
drop by chance: it  was  cast away as  a token to  any that  might follow. I 
think Pippin ran away from the trail for that purpose.' 
     'Then he at least was alive,'  said  Gimli. 'And he  had the use of his 
wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue in vain.' 

####-     'Let us hope that  he  did not pay  too dearly for his  boldness,' said 
Legolas.  'C ome! Let us  go on! The thought of those merry young folk  driven 
like cattle burns my heart.' 
     The  sun climbed to  the noon and then rode slowly  down the sky. Light 
clouds  came up out of the sea in the distant South and were blown away upon 
the breeze. The sun sank. Shadows rose behind and reached out long arms from 
the East. Still the hunters held on.  One day  now had  passed since Boromir  
fell, and  the Orcs were yet far ahead. No longer could any sight of them be 
seen in the level plains.  
     As nightshade was closing about  them Aragorn halted. Only twice in the 
day's  march had they rested for a brief  while, and twelve leagues  now lay 
between them and the eastern wall where they had stood at dawn. 
     'We have  come at last  to  a hard choice,' he said.  'Shall we  rest by 
night, or shall we go on while our will and strength hold?' 
     'Unless  our enemies rest also, they  will  leave us far  behind, if we 
stay to  sleep.' said Legolas. 'Surely even Orcs must pause on  the  march?' 
said Gimli. 'Seldom will  Orcs journey in the open under the sun.  yet these 
have done so,' said Legolas. 'Certainly they will not rest by night.' 
     'But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,' said Gimli. 
     'The trail is straight, and turns  neither right nor left, as far as my 
eyes can see,' said Legolas.  
     'Maybe,  I could  lead you  at guess in the darkness  and  hold  to the 
line,'  said  Aragorn;  'but  if we strayed, or they turned aside, then when 
light came there might be long delay before the trail was found again.' 
     'And  there  is  this also,' said Gimli: 'only by day can we see if any 
tracks lead away.  If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be  carried 
off, eastward,  say, to the Great River,  towards Mordor, we might pass  the 
signs and never know it.' 
     'That  is true,'  said Aragorn. 'But if I  read  the signs back  yonder  
rightly, the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole company  is now 
bound for Isengard. Their present course bears me out.' 
     'Yet it would  be rash to be sure of  their counsels,' said Gimli. 'And 
what of escape? In the dark we  should have passed the signs that led you to 
the brooch.' 
     'The Orcs will  be doubly on their  guard since then, and the prisoners 
even wearier,' said Legolas. 'There will  be no  escape again, if we  do not 
contrive  it. How  that is to be done cannot  be guessed, but first we  must  

####-overtake them.' 
     'And yet even I,  Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy of my 
folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause ' said Gimli. 'My 
heart burns me too, and I would  have  started sooner but now I must  rest a  
little to run the  better. And if we  rest, then the blind night is the time 
to do so.' 
     'I said that  it  was a  hard  choice,' said Aragorn.  'How shall we end 
this debate?' 
     'You are our guide,' said Gimli, 'and you are skilled in the chase. You  
shall choose.' 
     'My heart  bids me go on,'  said Legolas. 'But we must hold together. I 
will follow your counsel.' 
     'You give the choice to an ill chooser,' said Aragorn. 'Since we passed 
through the Argonath  my  choices have  gone amiss.' He  fell  silent gazing 
north and west into the gathering night for a long while. 
     'We will  not walk in  the dark,'  he  said at length.   'The  peril  of 
missing the trail  or  signs  of  other  coming and  going seems to  me  the 
greater. If the  Moon gave enough  light, we would use it, but alas! he sets 
early and is yet young and pale.' 
     'And  tonight he is shrouded anyway,' Gimli murmured.  'Would  that the 
Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!' 
     'It will be more needed  where it is bestowed,' said Aragorn. 'With him 
lies  the true Quest.  Ours is but a small matter in the great deeds of this 
time. A vain pursuit from its beginning, maybe, which no  choice of mine can 
mar or mend. Well, I have chosen. So let us use the time as best we may!' 
     He  cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, for he  had 
not slept since their night under the shadow of Tol Brandir. Before dawn was 
in the sky he woke and rose.  Gimli  was still deep in slumber,  but Legolas 
was standing,  gazing northwards into the darkness, thoughtful and silent as 
a young tree in a windless night.  
     'They are  far far away,' he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. 'I know in 
my heart that they have not rested this night.  Only an eagle could overtake 
them now.' 
     'Nonetheless we will still follow as we may,' said Aragorn. Stooping he 
roused the Dwarf. 'Come! We must go,' he said. 'The scent is growing cold.' 
     'But it is still dark,' said Gimli. 'Even Legolas on a  hill-top  could 
not see them till the Sun is up.' 

####-     'I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under moon 
or sun,' said Legolas.  
     'Where sight fails the earth may  bring us rumour,' said  Aragorn. 'The 
land  must  groan under  their hated  feet.' He stretched  himself  upon the 
ground with his ear pressed against the turf. He lay  there  motionless, for  
so long a time that Gimli wondered if he had swooned or fallen asleep again. 
Dawn came glimmering, and  slowly a grey  light grew about them.  At last he 
rose, and now his friends could see his face: it was pale and drawn, and his 
look was troubled. 
     'The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,' he said. 'Nothing  walks 
upon it for many miles about  us. Faint and far are the feet of our enemies.  
But loud are the hoofs of the horses. It comes to my mind that I heard them,  
even  as  I lay on the ground in sleep, and they troubled my dreams:  hor ses 
galloping, passing  in the West. But now they are  drawing ever further from 
us, riding northward. I wonder what is happening in this land!' 
     'Let us go!' said Legolas.  
     So the third day of their pursuit began. During  all its long  hours of 
cloud and fitful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now running, as if no 
weariness could quench the  fire that burned them.  They seldom spoke.  Over  
the  wide solitude they  passed  and their elven-cloaks  faded  against  the 
background of the grey-green fields; even  in the cool  sunlight  of mid-day 
few but elvish eyes would have marked them, until they  were close  at hand. 
Often  in their  hearts  they thanked the Lady  of  Lurien for  the gift  of 
lembas, for they could eat of it and find new strength even as they ran. 
     All day the track of  their enemies led  straight  on, going north-west 
without a break or turn. As once again the  day wore to its end they came to  
long treeless slopes, where the land rose, swelling up towards a line of low 
humpbacked downs ahead. The orc-trail grew fainter  as it bent north towards 
them, for  the ground became harder  and the grass  shorter. Far away to the 
left  the river Entwash wound, a silver thread in a green floor.  No  moving 
thing could be seen. Often Aragorn wondered  that they saw no sign  of beast 
or  man. The dwellings of the  Rohirrim were for the most  part many leagues 
away to the South, under the wooded eaves of the White Mountains, now 
hidden 
in mist and cloud;  yet  the Horse-lords  had formerly  kept  many  herds and  
studs  in  the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their realm, and there the 
herdsmen had wandered much, living  in  camp  and tent, even in winter -time. 

####-But now  all the land was empty, and there was silence  that did not seem to  
be the quiet of peace. 
     At  dusk they halted  again. Now twice twelve  leagues  they had passed 
over  the plains of Rohan  and  the wall of  the Emyn Muil was  lost in  the 
shadows  of the East. The  young moon  was glimmering in a misty sky, but it 
gave small light, and the stars were veiled. 
     'Now  do I most  grudge  a time of rest or any halt in our chase ' said 
Legolas. 'The Orcs have run before us, as if  the very whips  of Sauron were 
behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest and  the dark hills, 
and even now are passing into the shadows of the trees.' 
     Gimli ground his  teeth. 'This  is a bitter end to our  hope and to all 
our toil!' he said. 
     'To  hope, maybe, but  not to  toil,'  said Aragorn. 'We shall not turn 
back here. Yet I am weary.' He gazed  back along the  way that they had come 
towards the night gathering in the East. 'There is something strange at work 
in this land.  I distrust the  silence. I  distrust even  the pale Moon. The 
stars are  faint; and I am weary a s I have  seldom been before,  weary as no 
Ranger should be with a clear trail to follow. There is some will that lends 
speed  to our foes and sets an unseen barrier before us: a weariness that is 
in the heart more than in the limb.' 
     'Truly!' said Legolas. 'That I have known since first we came down from 
the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us but before us.' He pointed away 
over the  land  of  Rohan  into  the darkling West  under  the sickle  moon. 
'Saruman!'  muttered Aragorn. 'But he shall not  turn  us back!  Halt we must  
once more; for,  see! even the  Moon  is falling  into gathering  cloud. But 
north lies our road between down and fen when day returns.' 
     As before Legolas was first afoot, if indeed he had ever slept. 'Awake!  
Awake!' he cried. 'It is a red dawn. Strange things await us by the eaves of 
the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are called. Awake!' 
     The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off again. Slowly the 
downs  drew near. It was still an hour before  noon when they  reached them: 
green slopes rising to bare ridges  that ran in a line straight  towards the 
North. At their feet the ground was dry and the turf short, but a long strip 
of  sunken  land,  some  ten  miles  wide, lay  between them  and the  river  
wandering deep in  dim  thickets of reed  and rush. Just to  the West of the 
southernmost slope there was a great ring, where  the turf had been torn and 
beaten by many trampling feet. From it  the orc-trail ran out again, turning 

####-north along the  dr y  skirts  of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined  the 
tracks closely. 
     'They rested here a  while,' he said,  'but even the outward  trail  is 
already  old. I  fear  that your  heart  spoke truly,  Legolas: it is thrice 
twelve hours, I guess, since the Orcs stood where we now stand. If they held 
to their pace,  then  at sundown  yesterday they would reach  the borders of 
Fangorn.' 
     'I can see nothing  away north or west but  grass dwindling into mist,' 
said Gimli. 'Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?' 
     'It is  still  far  away,'  said Aragorn. 'If I remember rightly, these 
downs run  eight leagues  or  more to the north, and then north-west to  the 
issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land. another fifteen leagues 
it may be.' 
     'Well, let  us go on,' said Gimli. 'My legs must forget the miles. They 
would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.' 
     The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the  end of the line 
of  downs.  For many  hours they had  marched without rest. They  were going 
slowly now, and Gimli's back was bent.  Stone-hard are the Dwarves in labour 
or journey, but this endless  chase began to tell on him, as all hope failed 
in his heart. Aragorn walked behind  him, grim and silent,  stooping now and 
again to scan some print or mark upon the ground. Only Legolas still stepped 
as  lightly as ever,  his feet hardly seeming to press the grass. leaving no 
footprints  as he passed; but in  the waybread of the Elves he found all the 
sustenance tha t he needed, and  he could sleep, if sleep it  could be called 
by Men, resting his mind in the strange  paths of elvish dreams,  even as he 
walked open-eyed in the light of this world. 
     'Let us go  up on to this green hill!' he said.  Wearily they  fol lowed 
him, climbing the long slope, until  they  came out upon the  top. It  was a  
round hill smooth and  bare, standing by itself,  the  most northerly of the 
downs. The sun sank  and  the  shadows of evening fell  like a curtain. They  
were alone  in a gr ey formless world without mark or measure. Only  far away 
north-west  there  was  a  deeper darkness  against  the  dying  light:  the 
Mountains of Mist and the forest at their feet. 
     'Nothing can  we see to guide us here,' said Gimli. 'Well, now we  must  
halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!' 
     'The wind is north from the snows,' said Aragorn. 
     'And ere morning  it will be in  the East,' said Legolas.  'But rest if 

####-you must. Yet  do  not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown.  Rede oft is 
found at the rising of the Sun.' 
     'Three  suns already have risen on  our  chase and brought no counsel ' 
said Gimli. 
     The  night  grew  ever  colder.  Aragorn  and Gimli slept fitfully, and 
whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing beside them, or walking to 
and 
fro, singing softly to  himself in his own tongue, and as  he sang the white 
stars  opened in  the hard black vault above. So the  night passed. Together  
they watched the dawn grow slowly in the  sky, now bare and cloudless, until 
at  last the sunrise came. It was pale and clear. The  wind was  in the East  
and  all the mists had rolled away;  wide lands lay bleak about them in  the 
bitter light. 
     Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the Wold of Rohan that 
they had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great River. North-
westward 
stalked the dark forest of Fangorn; still ten leagues away stood its shadowy 
eaves, and its  further  slopes  faded into  the distant blue. Beyond  there 
glimmered far away, as if floating  on a  grey cloud, the white head of tall 
Methedras, the  last  peak  of  the  Misty Mountains. Out of  the forest the 
Entwash flowed to meet them, its  stream now swift and narrow, and its banks 
deep-cloven. The orc-trail turned from the downs towards it. 
     Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then the river  
back towards the forest,  Aragorn saw a shadow on the distant green,  a dark  
swift-moving  blur.  He cast  himself upon  the  ground  and  listened again 
intently.  But Legolas stood beside him, shading  his bright elven-eyes with 
his long slender hand, and he saw not a  shadow, nor  a blur, but the  small 
figures  of horsemen, many horsemen, and the glint of morning on the tips of 
their spears was  like the twinkle of minute stars beyond the edge of mortal 
sight. Far behind them a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads.  
     There was a silence  in the empty fields, arid Gimli could hear the air 
moving in the grass.  
     'Riders!' cried Aragorn, springing to  his feet.  'Many riders on swift 
steeds are coming towards us!' 
     'Yes,' said Legolas, 'there are one hundred  and five. Yellow is  their 
hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall.' 
     Aragorn smiled. 'Keen are the eyes of the Elves,' he said. 

####-     'Nay!  The  riders are little  more  than  five leagues distant,'  said 
Legolas.  
     'Five leagues or  one,' said Gimli; 'we cannot escape them in this bare 
land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?' 
     'We will wait,' said Aragorn. 'I  am weary, and our hunt has failed. Or 
at least  others were before us; for these horsemen are riding back down the 
orc-trail. We may get new s from them.' 
     'Or spears,' said Gimli. 
     'There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,' said Legolas. 
     'I did not say that we should hear good news,' said  Aragorn. 'But evil 
or good we will await it here.' 
     The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might be an easy  
mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down the northward  slope. 
A little  above the hill's foot they halted, and wrapping their cloaks about 
them, they sat huddled together upon the faded grass. The time passed slowly 
and heavily. The wind was thin and searching. Gimli was uneasy. 
     'What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?' he said. 'Do we sit here 
waiting for sudden death?' 
     'I have been among them,' answered Aragorn. 'They are proud and wilful, 
but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed; bold but not cruel; 
wise but unlearned,  writing no books  but  singing many  songs,  after  the 
manner of the children of Men before the Dark Years. But I do not know  what 
has happened here of late, nor in what mind the Rohirrim may now  be between 
the traitor  Saruman and the threat of  Sauron.  They  have  long  been  the 
friends of the people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was in 
forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them out of  the North,  
and  their  kinship  is rather  with  the  Bardings  of  Dale, and with  the 
Beornings of the Wood,  among whom may still be seen many men tall and 
fair, 
as are the Riders of Rohan. At least they will not love the Orcs.' 
     'But Gandalf spoke of a  rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor '  said 
Gimli. 
     'I believe it no more than did Boromir,' answered Aragorn. 
     'You will soon learn the truth,' said Legolas. 'Already they approach.' 
     At length even Gimli could  hear the distant  beat of  galloping hoofs. 
The horsemen,  following  the trail, had  turned  from the  river,   and were 
drawing near the downs. They were riding like the wind. 

####-     Now the  cries  of clear strong voices  came ringing over  the  fields. 
Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and  the foremost horseman 
swerved, passing by  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and  leading  the  host  back  
southward along the western skirts of the downs. After him they rode: a long 
line of mail-clad men. swift, shining, fell and fair to look upon. 
     Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their grey 
coats  glistened, their  long tails flowed  in the  wind, their  manes  were 
braided on their proud necks. The Men that rode them matched them well: tall 
and long-limbed; their hair, flaxen -pale,  flowed under  their  light helms,  
and streamed in long braids behind them; their faces were stern and keen. In 
their  hands were tall  spears of ash,  painted  shields were slung at their 
backs, long swords were at their belts, their burnished skirts of  mail hung 
down upon their knees.  
     In pairs  they galloped  by, and though every now  and then one rose in 
his  stirrups  and  gazed ahead  and to  either side, they appeared  not  to 
perceive  the three strangers sitting silently and  watching them. The  host  
had almost passed  when  suddenly Aragorn  st ood  up, and  called in a  loud 
voice: 
     'What news from the North, Riders of Rohan?' 
     With astonishing speed and  skill they  checked  their steeds, wheeled, 
and came charging round.  Soon the three companions  found  themselves  in a  
ring of horsemen  moving in a running circle, up the hill -slope  behind them 
and down,  round and round  them, and  drawing  ever inwards. Aragorn  stood 
silent, and  the other two  sat  without  moving, wondering what  way things 
would turn. 
     Without a word or cry, suddenly, the Riders halted. A thicket of spears 
were  pointed towards the strangers; and some  of the  horsemen had bows  in 
hand, and their  arrows were  already fitted  to the  string. Then one  rode 
forward, a tall man, taller than  all the rest; from  his helm as a crest  a  
white horsetail flowed. He advanced  until the point of his spear was within 
a foot of Aragorn's breast. Aragorn did not stir. 
     'Who are  you,  and what are you doing  in this  land?' said the Rider, 
using the  Common Speech of the West, in manner and tone like  to the speech 
of Boromir, Man of Gondor. 
     'I am called Strider,' answered Aragorn. 'I came out of the North. I am 
hunting Orcs.' 
     The Rider leaped from  his horse. Giving his spear to another  who rode 

####-up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood face to face with  
Aragorn, surveying him keenly, and not  without wonder. At  length  he spoke 
again. 
     'At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,' he said; 'but now I 
see that it is  not so. Indeed  you know  little of Orcs, if  you go hunting 
them  in this  fashion.  They were swift and well-armed, and they were many. 
You would have changed from hunters to prey, if ever you had overtaken them. 
But there is something strange about you, Strider.' He bent his clear bright 
eyes again upon the Ranger. 'That  is  no name for a Man that  you give. And 
strange too is your raiment.  Have you sprung out of the  grass? How did you 
escape our sight? Are you elvish folk?' 
     'No,'  said  Aragorn.  'One  only of us  is an  Elf, Legolas  from  the 
Woodland Realm in  distant Mirkwood. But we have  passed through 
Lothlurien, 
and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us.' 
     The Rider looked at them  with  renewed wonder, but  his eyes hardened. 
'Then there  is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell!' he said. 'Few 
escape  her  nets, they  say. These are  strange days! But if  you  have her  
favour, then you  also are  net -weavers and  sorcerers,  maybe.' He turned a  
cold glance suddenly upon Legolas and Gimli.  'Why do you  not speak, silent 
ones?' he demanded. 
     Gimli  rose and  planted  his feet  firmly apart: his hand gripped  the 
handle  of  his  axe,  and  his  dark  eyes flashed.  'Give  me  your  name, 
horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,' he said. 
     'As for that,' said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, 'the stranger  
should declare  himself first. Yet I am named  Jomer  son of Jomund,  and am 
called the Third Marshal of Riddermark.' 
     'Then Jomer son  of Jomund,  Third Marshal of Riddermark, let Gimli the 
Dwarf  Gluin's son warn you against foolish  words.  You speak evil of  that 
which is fair  beyond the  reach  of your  thought, and only little  wit can 
excuse you.' 
     Jomer's eyes  blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed 
in, advancing  their  spears. 'I  would cut  off your  head, beard and  all, 
Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the ground ' said Jomer. 
     'He stands not  alone,'  said Legolas,  bending his bow and fitting  an 
arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. 'You would  die before  your 
stroke fell.' 

####-     Jomer  raised  his sword, and things might  have  gone ill, but Aragorn 
sprang  between them, and raised his hand. 'Your pardon,  Jomer!' he  cried.  
'When you know more you will understand why  you have angered my 
companions.  
We intend no  evil to Rohan,  nor to any of its folk, neither to man  nor to 
horse. Will you not hear our tale before you strike?' 
     'I  will,'  said  Jomer  lowering  his  blade. 'Bu t  wanderers  in  the 
Riddermark  would be  wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt.  First  
tell me your right name.' 
     'First tell me whom you serve,' said Aragorn. 'Are you friend or foe of 
Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?' 
     'I serve only the Lord  of the  Mark, Thjoden  King  son  of  Thengel,' 
answered Jomer. 'We do  not serve the Power of the Black Land far away,  but 
neither are we yet at open war with him; and  if you  are fleeing  from him, 
then you had best leave this  land. There is  trouble now on all our borders,  
and we are threatened; but we desire only to be free, and to live as we have 
lived, keeping  our  own, and  serving  no  foreign  lord,  good or evil. We 
welcomed guests kindly in the better days, but in  these  times the unbidden 
stranger finds us swift and hard. Come! Who are you?  Whom do you serve?  
At 
whose command do you hunt Orcs in our land?' 
     'I serve no man,' said  Aragorn;  'but the servants of  Sauron I pursue 
into whatever land they may go. There are few among mortal Men who know 
more 
of Orcs; and I do not hunt them in this fashion out of choice. The Orcs whom 
we pursued  took captive two of my friends. In such need a man  that  has no  
horse  will go on foot, and he will  not ask for leave to  follow the trail. 
Nor will  he  count  the heads  of  the enemy save  with a  sword.  I am not 
weaponless.' 
     Aragorn  threw back his cloak. The elven-sheath glittered as he grasped 
it, and the bright blade of And®ril shone like a sudden flame as he swept it 
out.   'Elendil!'  he cried. 'I  am  Aragorn son  of Arathorn and  am  called 
Elessar, the Elfstone, D®nadan, the heir of Isildur Elendil's son of Gondor. 
Here is the Sword  that was  Broken and is forged again! Will you aid  me or 
thwart me? Choose swiftly!' 
     Gimli  and Legolas looked at their companion in amazement, for they had 
not seen him  in this  mood before. He seemed to have grown in stature while 

####-Jomer had shrunk; and in his  living face they caught a brief vision of  the  
power and majesty of the  kings  of stone. For a moment it seemed to the eyes 
of Legolas  that a white flame  flickered  on the  brows  of Aragorn  like a  
shining crown. 
     Jomer stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He cast down  his 
proud  eyes.  'These  are  indeed  strange days,'  he  muttered. 'Dreams and 
legends spring to life out of the grass.  
     'Tell  me,  lord,' he said,  'what  brings you  here?  And what was the 
meaning  of the dark  words?  Long  has  Boromir  son of Denethor  been gone 
seeking an answer, and the  horse that we lent him  came back riderless. What 
doom do you bring out of the North?' 
     'The doom of choice,' said Aragorn. 'You may say this to Thjoden son of 
Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against him. None may live 
now as they ha ve lived, and few  shall keep what they call their own. But of 
these  great  matters we  will speak  later. If  chance allows, I will  come 
myself to the king. Now I am in great need, and I ask for help,  or at least  
for tidings. You heard that we are pursuing an orc-host that carried off our 
friends. What can you tell us?' 
     'That  you  need not  pursue  them further,' said Jomer. 'The  Orcs are 
destroyed.' 
     'And our friends?' 
     'We found none but Orcs.' 
     'But that is strange indeed,' said Aragorn. 'Did you search the  slain?  
Were there no bodies other than those of orc-kind? They would be small. Only 
children to your eyes, unshod but clad in grey.' 
     'There  were no dwarves  nor children,' said Jomer. 'We counted all the 
slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and burned them, as 
is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.' 
     'We do not speak of dwarves or children,' said Gimli. 'Our friends were 
hobbits.' 
     'Hobbits?' said Jomer. 'And what may they be? It is a strange name.' 
     'A strange name  for a strange folk,' said Gimli. 'But these were  very 
dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled  
Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.' 
     'Halflings!' laughed the Rider that stood beside Jomer. 'Halflings! But 
they are  only  a little people in old songs and children's tales out of the 
North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight?' 

####-     'A man may do both,' said Aragorn. 'For not we bu t those who come after  
will make the  legends  of  our time. The green earth, say you?  That  is  a  
mighty matter of legend, though you tread it under the light of day!' 
     'Time is  pressing,'  said the  Rider, not  heeding  Aragorn. 'We  must  
hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Or let us 
bind them and take them to the king.' 
     'Peace, Jothain!' said Jomer in his own tongue. 'Leave me a while. Tell 
the jored to assemble on the path' and make ready to ride to the Entwade. ' 
     Muttering Jothain retired, and spoke to  the others. Soon they drew off 
and left Jomer alone with the three companions. 
     'All  that you say  is strange,  Aragorn.' he said. 'Yet you speak  the 
truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefore they are 
not easily deceived. But you have not told  all. Will you not now speak more 
fully of your errand, so that I may judge what to do?' 
     'I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks ago,' 
answered Aragorn.  'With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith. My errand was to 
go 
to that city with the son of Denethor,  to aid his folk in their war against 
Sauron. But the Company that I journeyed with had other  business. Of that I 
cannot speak now. Gandalf the Grey was our leader.' 
     'Gandalf!' Jomer exclaimed. 'Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark: but 
his name, I warn  you, is no longer a password to the king's favour.  He has 
been a guest in the land many times in the memory of men, coming as he will, 
after  a season,  or  after  many  years. He is  ever the  herald of strange 
events: a bringer of evil, some now say. 
     'Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone amiss.  
At that  time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we counted  Saruman 
our  friend,  hut Gandalf  came  then  and  warned us that  sudden  war  was 
preparing  in  Isengard.  He  said that  he himself had  been  a prisoner in 
Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and  he  begged  for help. But Thjoden would 
not listen to him, and he went away. Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in 
Thjoden's ears! He is  wroth.  For  Gandalf took  the  horse  that is called 
Shadowfax, the most precious of all the king's steeds, chief  of the Mearas, 
which only the Lord of the Mark may ride. For the sire of their race was the 
great horse of Eorl that knew the speech of Men. Seven  nights ago Shadowfax 
returned; but  the king's  anger is not less, for  now the horse is wild and 
will let no man handle him.' 

####-     'Then  Shadowfax  has found  his  way alone from  the far North,'  said 
Aragorn; 'for  it  was there that he and Gandalf  parted. But  alas! Gandalf 
will  ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines  of Moria and comes 
not again.' 
     'That  is heavy  tidings,'  said Jomer.  'At least to  me, and to many; 
though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.' 
     'It  is  tidings more grievous than any in  this  land can  understand, 
though it may touch them  sorely  ere the year is much older,' said Aragorn. 
'But when  the great fall,  the less must lead. My  part it has been to guide 
our Company on the long  road from Moria. Through Lurien we came -- of 
which 
it were well that you should learn  the truth  ere you speak of it  again  -- 
and thence down the leagues of the Great River to the falls of Rauros. There 
Boromir was slain by the same Orcs whom you destroyed.' 
     'Your  news is all of woe!' cried Jomer in dismay. 'Great harm is  this 
death to  Minas  Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! All spoke his 
praise.  He  came  seldom to the Mark, for he  was ever  in the wars on  the 
East -borders; but I have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl  than 
to the  grave Men  of Gondor  he seemed  to me, and likely to  prove a great 
captain of  his  people when  his time came. But we have had no word of this 
grief out of Gondor. When did he fall?' 
     'It is now the fourth day since he was slain,' answered  Aragorn,  'and 
since the evening of  that day  we  have  journeyed from the shadow  of  Tol  
Brandir.' 
     'On foot?' cried Jomer. 
     'Yes, even as you see us.' 
     Wide wonder came into Jomer's eyes. 'Strider is too poor a name, son of 
Arathorn,' he  said. 'Wingfoot I name  you.  This deed of the  three friends 
should be sung in many a hall. Forty leagues and five  you have measured ere 
the fourth day is ended! Hardy is the race of Elendil! 
     'But  now, lord, what would you  have me do! I must return in  haste to 
Thjoden. I spoke warily  before  my  men. It is true that  we are not yet at 
open  war with the Black Land, and there are some, close to the  king's ear, 
that speak craven counsels; but war is coming. We shall  not forsake our old 
alliance  with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: so say  I and 
all  who  hold  with me. The East-mark is my charge. the  ward  of  the Third 
Marshal, and I have  removed  all our  herds  and herdfolk, withdrawing them 

####-beyond Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.' 
     'Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?' said Gimli. 
     'We do not and we never have.'  said Jomer  with  a flash  of his eyes; 
'though it comes to my  ears that that lie has been told. Some years ago the 
Lord of the Black Land wished to  purchase horses of us at  great price, but 
we  refused him.  for he puts  beasts  to evil use. Then he sent  plundering 
Orcs, and  they carry  off what they can, choosing always the  black horses: 
few of these are now left. For that reason our feud with the Orcs is bitter. 
     'But at this  time our chief concern  is  with Saruman. He has  claimed 
lordship over  all this  land,  and there  has been war  between us for many 
months.  He has taken Orcs into his service,  and Wolf-riders, and evil Men,  
and he has closed the Gap against us, so that we are likely to be beset both 
east and west. 
     'It is ill dealing with such a  foe:  he  is a wizard both cunning  and 
dwimmer -crafty, having many guises. He walks here and there, they say, as an 
old  man hooded and cloaked, very like  to Gandalf, as many now recall.  His 
spies  slip  through every net, and his birds  of ill omen are abroad in the 
sky. I do not  know how it will all end, and  my heart  misgives me;  for it 
seems to  me that his friends do not all dwell in Isengard. But  if you come 
to the king's  house, you shall see for  yourself. Will  you not come? Do  I 
hope in vain that you have been sent to me for a help in doubt and need?' 
     'I will come when I may,' said Aragorn. 
     'Come now!' said Jomer. 'The Heir of Elendil would be a strength indeed 
to the  Sons of Eorl  in this evil tide.  There  is battle even  now upon the 
Westemnet, and I fear that it may go ill for us. 
     'Indeed in this riding north I went without the king's leave, for in my 
absence his  house  is left with little guard. But scouts warned me  of  the 
orc-host coming down out of the East  Wall  three nights ago, and among them 
they reported that some bore the white badges of Saruman. So suspecting what 
I  most fear, a league between  Orthanc  and  the Dark Tower, I led forth my 
jored,  men of  my own household; and  we overtook the Orcs at nightfall two 
days  ago, near to the borders of the Entwood. There we surrounded them, and 
gave battle yesterday at dawn. Fifteen of my men  I lost, and  twelve horses 
alas! For the  Orcs were greater in number than we counted on. Others joined 
them. coming out of the East across the Great River: their trail is plain to 
see a little north of this spot.  And  others, too, came out  of the forest. 
Great Orcs, who  also bore the White Hand of Isengard: that kind is stronger  

####-and more fell than all  others.  
     'Nonetheless we put an end to them.  But we have been too long away. We 
are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are  spare horses as you  
see. There is work for  the  Sword to do.  Yes, and we could find a  use for 
Gimli's axe  and  the bow of Legolas, if  they  will  pardon  my  rash  words 
concerning  the Lady of the Wood. I spoke only as do all men in my land, and 
I would gladly learn better.' 
     'I thank you for your fair words,' said Aragorn, 'and  my heart desires 
to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope remains.' 
     'Hope does not remain,'  said Jomer. 'You will not find your friends on 
the North-borders.' 
     'Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far from the 
East Wall that one  at least of  them was still alive there. But between the 
wall and the downs  we  have found no  other trace of them, and no trail has 
turned aside, this way or that, unless my skill has wholly left me.' 
     'Then what do you think has become of them?' 
     'I do not know. They may have been slain and burned among the Orcs; but 
that you  will say  cannot be, and I do not fear it. I  can only think  that 
they were  carried off into the forest before the  battle,  even  before you  
encircled your foes, maybe. Can you swear that none escaped your net in such 
a way?' 
     'I would swear that no Orc  escaped after we sighted them,' said Jomer. 
'We reached the forest -eaves before them, and if after that any living thing 
broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had some elvish power.' 
     'Our  friends  were  attired  even as we  are,' said Aragorn; 'and  you  
passed us by under the full light of day.' 
     'I had forgotten that,' said Jomer. 'It is  hard to be sure of anything 
among  so many  marvels. The  world is  all grown strange. Elf and Dwarf  in 
company walk in our daily  fields; and folk speak with the  Lady of the Wood 
and yet live; and the Sword comes  back to war  that was broken in  the long 
ages  ere  the  fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark!  How  shall a man 
judge what to do in such times?' 
     'As he ever has judged,' said Aragorn.  'Good and  ill have not changed 
since  yesteryear;  nor  are  they one thing among  Elves and  Dwarves µ and 
another among Men. It is a man's part to discern them, as much in the Golden 
Wood as in his own house.' 
     'True indeed,' said Jomer. 'But I do not doubt you, nor the  deed which 

####-my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It is against our 
law to let strangers wander  at  will  in our land, until the  king  himself 
shall  give them leave,  and  more strict is  the command in  these days  of 
peril. I have begged you to come back willingly with  me, and you will  not.  
Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three.' 
     'I do not  think your law was  made  for such a chance,' said  Aragorn. 
'Nor  indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this land before, more than 
once,  and ridden with the host of the Rohirrim, though under other name and 
in other guise. You  I have  not seen before,  for you are young, but I have 
spoken with Jomund your father, and with Thjoden  son  of Thengel.  Never in 
former days  would  any high lord of  this land  have  constrained a man  to 
abandon such a quest as mine. My duty at least is clear, to go on. Come now, 
son of Jomund, the choice must be made at last. Aid us,  or at the worst let 
us go free. Or seek to carry  out your law. If you do so there will be fewer  
to return to your war or to your king.' 
     Jomer was silent for a  moment,  then he  spoke. 'We both have need  of 
haste,' he said. 'My  company chafes to be away, and every hour lessens your 
hope. This  is my choice.  You  may go;  and  what  is more, I will lend you  
horses. This  only I ask: when  your quest is achieved, or  is  proved vain, 
return  with  the horses over the  Entwade  to Meduseld,  the high house  in 
Edoras  where Thjoden now sits. Thus you shall prove to him that I  have not 
misjudged. In this I place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of 
your good faith. Do not fail.' 
     'I will not,' said Aragorn. 
     There  was great wonder, and many dark  and doubtful glances, among his 
men, when Jomer gave orders that  the  spare horses were to be  lent to  the 
strangers; but only Jothain dared to speak openly. 
     'It  may be  well enough  for this lord  of the race of Gondor,  as  he 
claims,' he said, 'but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being given to a  
Dwarf?' 
     'No one,' said Gimli. 'And do not trouble: no one will ever hear of it. 
I would sooner  walk  than si t  on the back  of any beast so great,  free or 
begrudged.' 
     'But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,' said Aragorn. 
     'Come, you shall sit  behind me, friend  Gimli, said Legolas.  Then all 
will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled by one.' 
     A great dark-grey horse  was  brought to  Aragorn, and  he  mounted it. 

####-'Hasufel is  his name,'  said  Jomer.  'May he bear  you well and to  better  
fortune than Gbrulf, his late master!' 
     A  smaller and lighter  horse, but  restive and fiery,  was brought  to 
Legolas. Arod was his  name.  But Legolas asked them to take  off saddle and 
rein. 'I need them not,' he said, and leaped lightly up, and to their wonder  
Arod was  tame and willing  beneath  him, moving  here and there  with but a 
spoken word: such was the elvish way with all good beasts.  Gimli was lifted 
up behind  his friend. and  he clung to him, not much more at ease than  Sam 
Gamgee in a boat. 
     'Farewell, and may you find what  you  seek!' cried Jomer. 'Return with 
what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together!' 
     'I will come,' said Aragorn. 
     'And I will come, too,' said Gimli. 'The matter  of the  Lady Galadriel 
lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. ' 
     'We  shall see,' said Jomer. 'So many strange things  have chanced that 
to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a Dwarf's axe 
will seem no great wonder. Farewell!' 
     With that they parted.  Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When aft er 
a little Gimli looked back, the company of Jomer were  already small and far 
away. Aragorn did not look  back: he was watching the  trail as they sped on 
their way, bending low with his head beside the neck of Hasufel. Before long 
they came to the  borders of the Entwash, and there they met the other trail 
of which Jomer had spoken, coming down from the East out of the Wold. 
     Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then  leaping back into the  
saddle, he rode  away for  some distance  eastward, keeping to one side  and 
taking care not  to override  the footprints. Then he again  dismounted  and 
examined the ground, going backwards and forwards on foot. 
     'There  is  little  to  discover,'  he said when he returned. 'The main 
trail is all confused with the passage of  the  horsemen  as they came back; 
their outward  course  must have lain nearer  the river. But  this  eastward 
trail is fresh and clear. There is no sign there of any feet going the other  
way, back towards  Anduin. Now  we  must ride slower, and make sure  that no 
trace or footstep branches off on either side. The Orcs must have been aware 
from this point that they were  pursued; they may have made some  attempt to 
get their captives away before they were overtaken.' 
     As they rode forward the  day  was overcast.  Low grey clouds came over  
the  Wold.  A  mist  shrouded the sun. Ever nearer  the  tree-clad slopes of 

####-Fangorn loomed, slowly darkling as the sun  went west. They  saw no  sign of 
any  trail to  right or  left, but here  a nd  there they passed single Orcs,  
fallen in  their tracks as they  ran, with grey-feathered arrows sticking in 
back or throat. 
     At  last  as the  afternoon was  waning they came  to  the eaves of the 
forest, and in  an open  glade among the first trees they found the place of 
the great burning:  the ashes were  still hot  and smoking. Beside it was  a  
great pile of  helms and mail, cloven shields, and broken swords,  bows  and 
darts  and other gear of war. Upon  a stake in  the  middle was set a  great 
goblin head;  upon its shattered helm the  white badge could  still be seen. 
Further away, not far from the river, where  it  came streaming out from the 
edge of  the wood, there was a mound. It was newly raised: the raw earth was 
covered with fresh-cut turves: about it were planted fifteen spears.  
     Aragorn and  his  companions  searched far and wide about  the field of 
battle,  but  the light faded, and evening soon drew down, dim and misty. By 
nightfall they had discovered no trace of Merry and Pippin. 
     'We can  do no more,' said Gimli sadly. 'We have been set  many riddles 
since we  came to Tol Brandir, but this  is the hardest to  unravel. I would 
guess  that the burned bones of  the hobbits are now mingled with the Orcs'.  
It will be hard news for Frodo, if he lives to hear it; and hard too for the 
old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond was against their coming.' 
     'But Gandalf was not,' said Legolas.  
     'But Gandalf chose  to come himself, and he was the first to be  lost ' 
answered Gimli. 'His foresight failed him.' 
     'The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of safety, for  
himself  or for  others,' said Aragorn. 'There are some  things that  it  is 
better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be dark. But I shall 
not  depart  from  this  place yet.  In  any  case  we  must  here await the 
morning-light.' 
     A little way  beyond  the battle-field they  made  their  camp under  a  
spreading tree: it looked  like a chestnut, and yet it still bore many broad 
brown leaves  of a former year,  like dry  hands with long splayed  fingers;  
they rattled mournfully in the night-breeze. 
     Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. 'Let us light 
a fire,'  he said. 'I  care  no longer for the  danger. Let the Orcs come as 
thick as summer-moths round a candle!' 
     'If those  unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it  might draw them 

####-hither,' said Legolas.  
     'And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,' said Aragorn. 
'We are  near to the mountain-marches of the traitor Saruman. Also we are on 
the  very edge of Fangorn,  and  it is  perilous to touch  the trees of that 
wood, it is said.' 
     'But  the Rohirrim  made a  great burning here yesterday,'  said Gimli, 
'and  they felled  trees for the fire, as can be seen.  Yet they passed  the 
night after safely here, when their labour was ended.' 
     'They were  many,' said  Aragorn,  'and they  do not heed the wrath  of 
Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under  the trees. But 
our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself. So have a care!  
Cut no living wood!' 
     'There  is no need,' said  Gimli. 'The Riders have  left chip and bough 
enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.' He went off to gather fuel, 
and busied himself with building and kindling a fire; but Aragorn sat silent 
with his back to the great tree, deep in thought; and Legolas stood alone in 
the open, looking towards the profound  shadow of the wood, leaning forward, 
as one who listens to voices calling from a distance. 
     When the  Dwarf had  a  small bright blaze going, the three  companions 
drew close  to  it and sat together,  shrouding  the light with their hooded 
forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree reaching out above them.  
     'Look!' he said. 'The tree is glad of the fire!' 
     It  may  have  been  that the dancing  shadows tricked their eyes,  but 
certainly to each  of the companions the  boughs appeared to be bending this 
way and that so as to come  above the flames, wh ile  the upper branches were 
stooping down; the brown  leaves  now stood  out  stiff, and rubbed together  
like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in the warmth. 
     There was a silence, for suddenly the dark  and unknown forest, so near 
at hand,  made  itself  felt  as  a great  brooding presence, full  of secret 
purpose. After a while Legolas spoke again. 
     'Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,' he said. 'Do you  know 
why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir had heard?' 
     'I have heard many  tales  in Gondor and elsewhere,' said Aragorn, 'but 
if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them only fables that 
Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had thought of  asking you what 
was 
the truth of the  matter . And if an Elf of the Wood does not know, how shall  

####-a Man answer?' 
     'You  have  journeyed  further  than  I,'  said Legolas. 'I  have heard 
nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that  tell how the  Onodrim,  
that Men  call Ents,  dwelt there  long ago; for Fangorn is old, old  even as 
the Elves would reckon it.' 
     'Yes,  it  is  old,'  said  Aragorn,  'as  old  as the  forest  by  the 
Barrow-downs, and it is  far greater. Elrond says that the two are akin, the 
last  strongholds  of  the  mighty  woods of the  Elder Days, in  which  the  
Firstborn roamed while Men still slept. Yet Fangorn holds some secret of its 
own. What it is I do not know.' 
     'And  I  do not wish to know,' said Gimli. 'Let nothing that  dwells in 
Fangorn be troubled on my account!' 
     They  now drew  lots for the watches, and the lot for  the first  watch 
fell to Gimli. The others lay down. Almost at once sleep laid hold  on them. 
'Gimli!' said  Aragorn drowsily. 'Remember, it is perilous  to  cut bough or  
twig from  a living tree  in Fangorn. But do not stray far in search of dead 
wood. Let the fire die rather! Call me at need!' 
     With  that  he  fell asleep.  Legolas already lay motionless, his  fair 
hands folded upon  his breast,  his eyes unclosed, blending living night and 
deep dream, as is the way with Elves. Gimli sat hunched by the fire, running 
his thumb  thoughtfully along  the edge of  his axe. The tree rustled. There 
was no other sound. 
     Suddenly  Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of the fire-light 
stood an old bent man, leaning on a staff, and wrapped in a great cloak; his 
wide-brimmed hat was pulled  down over his eyes. Gimli sprang up, too 
amazed 
for the moment to  cry out, though at once the thought flashed into his mind  
that Saruman had caught them. Both Aragorn and Legolas, roused by his 
sudden 
movement, sat up and stared. The old man did not speak or make, sign. 
     'Well, father,  what can we do  for you?'  said Aragorn, leaping to his 
feet. 'Come and be warm, if you are cold!'  He strode  forward, but the  old 
man was gone. There  was  no trace of him to be found near at hand, and they 
did not dare to wander far. The moon had set and the night was very dark. 
     Suddenly Legolas gave a cry. 'The horses! The horses!' 
     The horses wer e gone.  They had dragged their pickets and  disappeared.  
For  me time the three companions stood still  and silent, troubled  by this 

####-new stroke of ill fortune. They were under the eaves of Fangorn, and endless 
leagues lay  between them and the Men of  Rohan,  their only friends in this 
wide  and dangerous land. As they stood, it seemed to  them that they heard,  
far off in the night. the sound of horses whinnying and  neighing. Then  all 
was quiet again, except for the cold rustle of the wind. 
     'Well, they are gone,' said  Aragorn at last. 'We cannot  find  them or  
catch  them;  so that  if they do not return of their  own will, we must  do 
without. We started on our feet, and we have those still.' 
     'Feet!' said Gimli. 'But we cannot eat them as well  as walk on  them ' 
He threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down beside it. 
     'Only a few hours ago  you were unwilling  to sit on a horse of Rohan,' 
laughed Legolas. 'You will make a rider yet.' 
     'It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,' said Gimli. 
     'If you wish  to know what I think,'  he began  again after  a while 'I  
think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember  the words of Jomer: he walks 
about 
like an old man hooded and cloaked. Those were  the words.  He has gone  off 
with our horses, or scared them away, and here we are. There is more trouble 
coming to us, mark my words!' 
     'I mark them,' said Aragorn. 'But I marked also that this old man had a  
hat not a hood. Still I do not  doubt that  you guess right, and that we are 
in peril here, by night or day. Yet in the meantime there is nothing that we 
can do but  rest, while we may. I will  watch for a while now, Gimli. I have 
more need of thought than of sleep.' 
     The night  passed  slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and Gimli followed 
Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing  happened. The old man did 
not appear again, and the horses did not return. 
 

####- 

Chapter 3. The Uruk-Hai 

 
 
     Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream:  it seemed that he could  hear 
his own small  vo ice  echoing in black tunnels,  calling  Frodo, Frodo!  But 
instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous  orc-faces grinned  at  him  out of the 
shadows, hundreds of hideous arms grasped at him from  every side. Where 
was 
Merry? 
     He  woke. Cold air blew on his  face. He was lying on his back. Evening  
was coming and  the sky above was growing dim. He turned and found that  the 
dream  was little worse than  the  waking. His wrists, legs, and ankles were 
tied with cords.  Beside him Merry lay,  white-faced, with a  dirty rag bound  
across his brows. All about them sat or stood a great company of Orcs. 
     Slowly in Pippin's aching head memory pieced itself together and became 
separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and  Merry had run off into  the 
woods. What had come over them? Why had they dashed off like that, taking 
no 
notice  of  old  Strider? They  had  run a  long  way shouting--he could not 
remember how far or how long; and then suddenly they had crashed  right into 
a  group  of Orcs: they  were standing listening, and they did not appear to 
see Merry and Pippin until they were  almost in their arms. Then they yelled 
and  dozens of other goblins had sprung out  of the  trees. Merry and he had 
drawn their swords, but the  Orcs did not wish to fight, and had tried  only 
to lay  hold of them, even when Merry had cut off several  of their arms and 
hands. Good old Merry!  
     Then  Boromir  had come  leaping through  the  trees. He had made  them 
fight. He slew many of them and the rest fled.  But they had not gone far on  
the way back when they were attacked again. by a hundred Orcs at least, some 
of  them very large, and they shot  a rain of  arrows:  always  at  Boromir. 
Boromir had blown his great horn till the woods rang,  and at first the Orcs 
had  been dismayed and  had  drawn back; but when no  answer but the  echoes 
came, they had attacked more fierce  than ever. Pippin did not remember much 
more.  His last memo was of Boromir  leaning against a tree, plucking out an 
arrow; then darkness fell suddenly. 
     'I suppose I was knocked on the head,' he said to himself. 'I wonder if 

####-poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to  Boromir? Why  didn't the 
Orcs 
kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?' 
     He could  not  answer the questions. He felt  cold and  sick.  'I  wish 
Gandalf  had never persuaded Elrond to let  us come,' he thought. 'What good 
have I been? Just a  nuisance: a  passenger, a piece  of luggage. And now  I 
have been stolen  and I am  just  a piece of  luggage for the  Orcs.  I hope 
Strider or someone will come and claim us! But ought I to hope for it? Won't 
that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!' 
     He  struggled  a little, quite  uselessly. One of the Orcs sitting near 
laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable  tongue. 'Rest  
while  you  can, little fool!' he said then to Pippin, in the Common Speech, 
which he made almost  as hideous as  his own language.  'Rest while you can!  
We'll find  a use for your  legs before  long. You'll wish you had  got none 
before we get home.' 
     'If I had my way, you'd  wish you  were dead now,' said the other. 'I'd 
make you squeak,  you miserable rat.' He stooped over  Pippin  bringing  his 
yellow fangs close to his face.  He had  a  black  knife  with a long jagged 
blade  in  his hand.  'Lie quiet, or  I'll tickle you with this,' he hissed. 
'Don't  draw attention  to yourself,  or  I may forget my orders.  Curse the 
Isengarders! Ugl®k  u  bagronk sha  pushdug Saruman -glob  b®bhosh skai':   
he 
passed into a long angry speech in his own tongue that slowly died away into 
muttering and snarling. 
     Terrified  Pippin lay still, though the pain at  his wrists  and ankles 
was  growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his back.  To take 
his mind off himself he listened intently to all that  he could  hear. There 
were many  voices round about, and though orc-speech  sounded  at all  times 
full  of hate and anger, it  seemed plain  that something like a quarrel had 
begun, and was getting hotter. 
     To Pippin's  surpr ise he  found that much of the  talk was intelligible 
many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of 
two 
or three quite different tribes  were present, and they could not understand 
one another's orc-speech. There  was  an angry  debate concerning  what they 
were to do now: which way they were to take and what should be done with the 
prisoners. 

####-     'There's no time to kill them properly,' said one. 'No time for play on 
this trip.' 
     'That  can't  be helped,' said another. 'But why not kill  them  quick, 
kill them  now? They're  a cursed  nuisance, and we're in a hurry. Evening's 
coming on, and we ought to get a move on.' 
     'Orders.' said a third  voice in  a  deep growl. 'Kill all but  NOT the 
Halfings;  they are to be brought back ALIVE  as quickly as possible . That's 
my orders.' 
     'What are they wanted for?'  asked  several voices. 'Why alive? Do they 
give good sport?' 
     'No!  I  heard that  one of them has  got something,  something  that's 
wanted for  the  War,  some   elvish plot  or other.  Anyway they'll both  be 
questioned.' 
     'Is that all you know? Why don't  we search them and find out? We might  
find something that we could use ourselves.' 
     'That is a very interesting remark,' sneered a  voice,  softer than the 
others but more evil. 'I may have to report that. The prisoners  are  NOT to 
be searched or plundered: those are my orders.' 
     'And  mine  too,'  said  the  deep  voice. 'Alive and as  captured;  no 
spoiling. That's my orders.' 
     'Not our order s!' said one of the earlier voices. 'We have come all the 
way from the Mines to kill, and avenge our folk. I wish to kill, and then go 
back north.' 
     'Then you can wish  again,' said the  growling voice. 'I  am  Ugl®k.  I 
command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.' 
     'Is Saruman the  master  or the Great Eye?'  said the  evil  voice. 'We 
should go back at once to Lugb®rz.' 
     'If we could cross the Great River, we might,' said another voice. 'But 
there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges.' 
     'I came  across,'  said  the evil  voice.  'A winged  Nazgyl awaits  us 
northward on the east -bank.' 
     'Maybe, maybe! Then you'll fly off with our prisoners, and get  all the 
pay and praise in Lugb®rz,  and leave  us to foot it as best we  can through 
the Horse-country.  No, we must  stick together.  These lands are dangerous:  
full of foul rebels and brigands.' 
     'Aye, we must stick together,' growled Ugl®k. 'I don't trust you little 
swine. You've no guts outside your own sties. But for us you'd all  have run 

####-away. We are the fighting  Uruk-hai! We slew the  great warrior. We took the 
prisoners. We are the servants of Saruman the Wise, the White Hand: the Hand 
that gives us man's-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here, 
and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am Ugl®k. I have spoken.' 
     'You have  spoken more than enough,  Ugl®k,' sneered the evil voice. 'I  
wonder how  they would like  it  in  Lugb®rz. They might think  that Ugl®k's 
shoulders  needed relieving  of a  swollen head. They might  ask  where  his 
strange ideas came  from. Did they come  from Saruman, perhaps? Who  does 
he 
think he is, setting up on his own with his  filthy white badges? They might 
agree with me, with  Grishnbkh their trusted messenger; and I  Grishnbkh say 
this: Saruman is a fool. and a dirty treacherous fool. But the  Great Eye is 
on him. 
     'Swine  is  it? How  do  you  folk  like  being  called  swine  by  the 
muck -rakers  of  a  dirty  little  wizard?  It's  orc-flesh  they  eat, I'll 
warrant.' 
     Many loud yells  in orc-speech  answered him, and the ringing  clash of 
weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin rolled over, hoping to see what would 
happen.  His guards had gone to  join in the  fray. In the twilight he saw a  
large  black  Orc,  probably  Ugl®k,  standing  facing  Grishnbkh,  a  short 
crook -legged creature, very broad and with long arms that hung almost to the 
ground. Round  them  were many smaller  goblins. Pippin supposed that  these 
were the ones from the  North. They had drawn  their knives and swords,  but 
hesitated to attack Ugl®k. 
     Ugl®k  shouted, and a  number of other Orcs of  nearly his own size ran 
up. Then suddenly, without  warning, Ugl®k sprang  forwards,  and  with  two 
swift strokes swept  the heads  off two of his opponents.  Grishnbkh stepped 
aside and  vanished  into the  shadows. The others gave way, and one stepped 
backwards  and fell  over Merry's  prostrate  form with  a  curse. Yet  that 
probably saved his life, for Ugl®k's followers leaped over him and  cut down 
another with their broad-bladed swords. It was the yellow-fanged  guard. His 
body fell right on top of Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife. 
     'Put up your weapons!' shouted Ugl®k. 'And let's have no more nonsense! 
We go straight west  from here, and down the stair.  From  there straight to 
the  downs, then along the  river to the forest. And we march day and night. 
That clear?' 
     'Now,' thought  Pippin,  'if  only it takes  that ugly  fellow a little 

####-while to get his  troop under control, I've got  a chance.' A gleam of  hope 
had come to him. The edge  of the black knife had snicked his arm, and  then 
slid down to his wrist.  He  felt the blood trickling on to his hand, but he 
also felt the cold touch of steel against his skin. 
     The Orcs were getting ready to march again, but some of the Northerners 
were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew two more before the rest were 
cowed.  There  was  much  cursing  and confusion. For  the moment Pippin was 
unwatched. His legs were  securely bound, but his arms were  only tied about 
the wrists,  and his hands were  in front  of  him. He could  move them both 
together, though the bonds were cruelly tight. He pushed the dead Orc to one 
side, then hardly daring to  breathe, he drew the  knot of the wrist -cord up 
and down against the blade of the knife. It was sharp and the dead hand held 
it fast. The cord was cut! Quickly Pippin took it in his fingers and knotted  
it again into a loose  bracelet of two loops and slipped it  over his hands.  
Then he lay very still. 
     'Pick up those prisoners!' shouted Ugl®k.  'Don't play any  tricks with 
them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will die too.' 
     An Orc  seized Pippin like a sack. put its head between his tied hands,  
grabbed his arms and  dragged them  down, until  Pippin's  face was  crushed 
against its neck; then it jolted off  with him. Another treated Merry in the 
same way. The Orc's clawlike hand gripped Pippin's arms like iron; the nails 
bit into him. He shut his eyes and slipped back into evil dreams.  
     Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony floor again. It was early night, 
but the  slim moon was already falling westward. They were on the  edge of a 
cliff that seemed to look out  over a sea of pale mist. There was a sound of 
water falling nearby. 
     'The scouts have come back at last,' said an Orc close at hand. 
     'Well, what did you discover?' growled the voice of Ugl®k. 
     'Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All's clear now.' 
     'Now,  I  daresay. But how  long? You fools! You should  have shot him.  
He'll  raise the alarm. The cursed horsebreeders will hear of us by morning. 
Now we'll have to leg it double quick.' 
     A shadow bent over  Pippin. It  was Ugl®k. 'Sit up! ' said the  Orc. 'My 
lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to climb down and you  must  
use your legs. Be  helpful now. No  crying out, no trying to escape. We have 
ways of paying for tricks that you won't like, though they won't spoil  your 
usefulness for the Master.' 

####-     He cut the thongs round Pippin's legs and ankles, picked him  up by his 
hair  and stood him  on his feet. Pippin fell down, and Ugl®k dragged him up 
by  his hair again. Several Orcs  laughed. Ugl®k thrust a  flask between his 
teeth and poured some burning liquid down  his  throat: he felt a hot fierce 
glow  flow through  him.  The pain in his legs and ankles vanished. He could 
stand. 
     'Now for  the other!' said Ugl®k.  Pippin saw him go  to Merry, who was 
lying  close  by,  and kick  him. Merry groaned.  Seizing him roughly  Ugl®k 
pulled  him into a sitting position, and tore the bandage off his head. Then 
he smeared the wound with some dark  stuff out of a small wooden  box. Merry 
cried out and struggled wildly. 
     The Orcs clapped and  hooted. 'Can't take his medicine,'  they  jeered. 
'Doesn't know what's good for him. Ai! We shall have some fun later.' 
     But  at the moment Ugl®k was not engaged in  sport. He needed speed and 
had to humour  unwilling followers. He was healing Merry in orc-fashion; and 
his treatment worked swiftly. When he had forced a drink from his flask down 
the  hobbit's throat, cut his leg-bonds, and dragged him to  his feet, Merry 
stood up, looking pale but grim  and defiant, and very  much alive. The gash 
in his forehead gave him  no  more trouble, but he bore a  brown scar to the 
end of his days.  
     'Hullo, Pippin!' he said.  'So you've come on  this  little expedition, 
too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?' 
     'Now then!' said Ugl®k.  'None of that!  Hold your tongues. No  talk to 
one another. Any  trouble will be  reported at the other end, and He'll know 
how to pay  you. You'll  get bed and breakfast  all right: more than you can 
stomach.' 
     The orc-band  began to descend a  narrow ravine  leading down into  the 
misty plain below.  Merry and  Pippin,  separated by a  dozen  Orcs or more, 
climbed down with  them. At the  bottom  they  stepped on to  grass, and the 
hearts of the hobbits rose. 
     'Now  straight on!'  shouted Ugl®k. 'West  and a  little  north. Follow 
Lugdush.' 
     'But what are we going to do at sunrise?' said some of the Northerners.  
     'Go on running,' said Ugl®k. 'What do you think? Sit  on the  grass and 
wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?' 
     'But we can't run in the sunlight.' 
     'You'll run with me  behind you,' said Ugl®k. 'Run! Or you'll never see 

####-your beloved  holes again. By  the White Hand! What's the use of sending out 
mountain-maggots  on  a trip, only half trained. Run, curse  you! Run  while 
night lasts!' 
     Then the whole  company  began to  run  with the long loping strides of 
Orcs. They kept  no order, thrusting, jostling, and cursing; yet their speed 
was very great. Each hobbit had a guard of three. Pippin was far back in the 
line. He  wondered how long he would be able to  go on at this pace: he  had 
had no food since the morning. One of  his guards had a whip. But at present 
the orc-liquor was still hot in him. His wits, too, were wide-awake. 
     Every now and again there  came  into his mind unbidden a vision of the  
keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, and running, running behind. 
But  what  could even a Ranger see except a confused  trail of orc-feet? His 
own  little prints  and Merry's  were overwhelmed by  the  trampling of  the 
iron-shod shoes before them and behind them and about them. 
     They had  gone  only a mile  or so from the cliff when the  land sloped 
down into a wide shallow depression, where the ground was soft and wet. Mist 
lay there, pale-glimmering in the  last rays of  the  sickle moon.  The dark 
shapes of the Orcs in front grew dim, and then were swallowed up. 
     'Ai! Steady now!' shouted Ugl®k from the rear. 
     A sudden thought leaped into Pippin's mind, and he acted on it at once. 
He  swerved aside to the right, and  dived out of the reach of his clutching 
guard, headfirst into the mist; he landed sprawling on the grass.  
     'Halt!' yelled Ugl®k. 
     There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin sprang up and ran. 
But the Orcs were after him. Some suddenly loomed up right in front of him. 
     'No hope  of escape!' thought Pippin. 'But there is a hope  that I have 
left  some of  my own marks unspoilt on the  wet ground.' He groped with his 
two tied hands at his throat, and unclasped the brooch of his cloak. Just as 
long arms and  hard claws seized him. he  let it fall. 'There  I  suppose it 
will lie until the end of time,' he thought. 'I don't  know why I did it. If 
the others have escaped, they've probably all gone with Frodo.' 
     A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stifled a cry. 
     'Enough!' shouted Ugl®k running  up. 'He's still got to run a long  way 
yet. Make 'em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.' 
     'But that's not  all,' he snarled, turning to Pippin. 'I shan't forget. 
Payment is only put off. Leg it!' 
     Neither  Pippin nor Merry remembered  much  of the later  part  of  the 

####-journey. Evil  dreams and evil  waking were blended  into  a  long tunnel of 
misery,  with hope  growing ever fainter behind.  They  ran, and  they  ran, 
striving to keep up the  pace set by  the Orcs, licked  every now  and again 
with a cruel thong cunningly  handled. If they halted or stumbled, they were 
seized and dragged for some distance. 
     The  warmth  of  the orc-draught  had  gone. Pippin felt cold and  sick  
again. Suddenly  he  fell face downward on the turf. Hard hands with rending 
nails  gripped  and lifted him. He was  carried like a  sack  once more, and 
darkness  grew about him:  whether the  darkness  of  another  night,  or  a  
blindness of his eyes, he could not tell. 
     Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed that  many of the 
Orcs were demanding a halt. Ugl®k was shouting. He felt himself flung to the 
ground,  and he lay as he fell, till black dreams  took  him. But he did not 
long  escape from  pain; soon  the iron grip of  merciless hands was on  him 
again.  For  a  long  time  he was  tossed and shaken, and then  slowly  the 
darkness  gave way, and he came  back to the waking  world and found that it 
was morning. Orders were shouted and he was thrown roughly on the grass.  
     There  he  lay for a while, fighting  with despair. His head  swam, but 
from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given another draught.  
An Orc stooped over him, and flung him some bread  and a strip of raw  dried 
flesh. He ate  the  stale grey  bread hungrily, but  not the  meat.  He  was 
famished but not yet so famished as to eat flesh flung to him by an Orc, the 
flesh of he dared not guess what creature. 
     He sat up and  looked about.  Merry was not  far away. They were by  the 
banks  of a swift narrow  river.  Ahead mountains  loomed: a tall  peak  was 
catching the first rays of the sun. A dark smudge of forest lay on the lower  
slopes before them. 
     There was much shou ting and debating among  the Orcs; a  quarrel seemed 
on  the  point  of  breaking  out again  between  the  Northerners  and  the 
Isengarders. Some  were  pointing back  away south, and  some were  pointing 
eastward. 
     'Very  well,' said Ugl®k. 'Leave them  to me then! No killing,  as I've 
told you before; but if you want to  throw away  what we've come all the way 
to get, throw it  away! I'll look after it. Let the fighting Uruk-hai do the 
work, as usual. If you're afraid of the Whiteskins, run!  Run!  There's  the 
forest,' he  shouted, pointing ahead. 'Get to it! It's your  best hope.  Off 
you go!  And quick,  before I knock a few more heads off, to  put some sense 

####-into the others.' 
     There was some cursing and scuffling, and  then most of the Northe rners 
broke away and dashed off, over a hundred of  them, running wildly along the 
river towards the mountains.  The hobbits were left with the  Isengarders: a  
grim  dark  band, four score at  least of large, swart, slant-eyed Orcs with 
great bows and shor t  broad-bladed swords. A  few  of the larger and  bolder  
Northerners remained with them. 
     'Now we'll deal with  Grishnbkh,'  said Ugl®k; but some even of his own 
followers were looking uneasily southwards.  
     'I  know,' growled Ugl®k.  'The cursed horse-boys have got  wind of us. 
But  that's all your  fault,  Snaga. You and the  other scouts ought to have 
your ears cut  off. But we are the fighters. We'll feast  on horseflesh yet, 
or something better.' 
     At  that moment Pippin  saw why some  of the  troop  had been  pointing  
eastward. From  that  direction there  now came hoarse cries, and  there was 
Grishnbkh again, and  at his  back a  couple  of  score of others like  him: 
long-armed  crook -legged Orcs. They  had a red eye painted on their shields.  
Ugl®k stepped forward to meet them. 'So you've come back?' he said. 'Thought 
better of it, eh?' 
     'I've returned to  see  that  Orders are  carried out and the prisoners 
safe,' answered Grishnbkh. 
     'Indeed!'  said Ugl®k.  'Waste  of  effort.  I'll see that  orders  are 
carried out in my command. And what else did you  come back for? You went 
in 
a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?' 
     'I left a  fool,' snarled Grishnbkh. 'But there were some stout fellows 
with him that are too good to lose. I knew you'd lead them into a mess. I've 
come to help them.' 
     'Splendid!'  laughed  Ugl®k.  'But  unless  you've  got some  guts  for  
fighting, you've taken the wrong way. Lugb®rz was your road.  The 
Whiteskins 
are coming. What's happened to your  precious  Nazgyl?  Has  he had  another  
mount shot under him? Now, if you'd brought him along, that might have  been 
useful-if these Nazgyl are all they make out.' 
     'Nazgyl, Nazgyl,' said Grishnbkh, shivering and licking his lips, as if 
the word had a foul taste that he savoured painfully. 'You  speak of what is 
deep beyond the  reach of your muddy  dreams,  Ugl®k,' he said. 'Nazgyl! Ah! 

####-All that  they make  out! One day  you'll  wish that you  had not said that. 
Ape!' he snarled fiercely.  'You ought to know that they're the apple of the 
Great Eye. But the winged  Nazgyl: not  yet, not yet. He won't let them show 
themselves across the Great River yet, not too soon. They're for the War -and 
other purposes.' 
     'You seem  to know a lot,' said  Ugl®k. 'More   than is good for you,  I 
guess.  Perhaps those  in  Lugb®rz  might wonder how, and  why. But  in  the 
meantime the  Uruk -hai of Isengard can do the dirty  work,  as usual.  Don't  
stand slavering there! Get your rabble together! The other swine are legging 
it to the forest. You'd better  follow.  You wouldn't get  back to the Great 
River alive. Right off the mark! Now! I'll be on your heels.' 
     The Isengarders seized Merry and  Pippin again  and slung them on their  
backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after hour they ran, pausing now and 
again only to sling the hobbits to fresh  carriers. Either because they were 
quicker and hardier, or because of some plan of Grishnbkh's, the Isengarders 
gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor,  and Grishnbkh's folk closed in 
behind. Soon they  were  gaining also on  the Northerners ahead.  The forest  
began to draw nearer. 
     Pippin was bruised and torn,  his aching  head was grated by the filthy 
jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held him. Immediately in front were bowed 
backs, and tough thick legs going up and down, up and down, unresting, as if 
they were made of wire and horn,  beating out  the nightmare seconds  of  an 
endless time. 
     In  the  afternoon Ugl®k's  troop overtook the  Northerners.  They were 
flagging in the rays  of the  bright sun, winter sun shining in  a pale cool 
sky though it was; their heads were down and their tongues lolling out. 
     'Maggots!' jeered the Isengarders. 'You're cooked. The Whiteskins  will 
catch you and eat you. They're coming!' 
     A cry  from Grishnbkh  showed that  this was  not mere jest.  Horsemen, 
riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still  far behind, but gaining 
on the Orcs, gaining on  them like a tide over the flats on folk straying in 
a quicksand. 
     The  Isengarders  began  to run with a redoubled  pace that  astonished 
Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed  for the end of  a race. Then he saw that 
the  sun was sinking, falling behind the  Misty Mountains;  shadows  reached 
over the land. The soldiers  of Mordor lifted their heads and  also began to 
put on  speed. The forest was dark and close. Already they had passed a  few 

####-outlying trees.  The land was beginning to slope upwards. ever more steeply; 
but the  Orcs did not halt. Both Ugl®k and Grishnbkh  shouted, spurring them 
on to a last effort. 
     'They will  make it yet. They will escape,' thought Pippin. And then he 
managed  to twist  his neck.  so  as  to  glance back with  one eye over his 
shoulder. He saw that riders away eastward were already level with the Orcs, 
galloping over  the plain.  The sunset gilded their spears  and helmets, and 
glinted  in  their  pale  flowing  hair.  They  were  hemming the  Orcs  in, 
preventing them  from  scattering, and  driving them along the  line of  the 
river. 
     He wondered  very much what kind of folk they were. He wished  now that 
he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps and things; but in 
those days the plans for the journey seemed to be  in  more competent hands, 
and he had never reckoned with being cut off from Gandalf, or from  Strider, 
and  even  from Frodo. All  that he  could remember  about  Rohan  was  that 
Gandalf's horse, Shadowfax,  had come from  that land. That sounded hopeful, 
as far as it went. 
     'But how will  they know that  we are not  Orcs?' he thought. 'I  don't  
suppose they've ever  heard  of hobbits down  here. I suppose I  ought to be 
glad that the beastly Orcs  look like being destroyed, but I would rather be 
saved  myself.' The chances were that  he and Merry wou ld be killed together 
with their captors, before ever the Men of Rohan were aware of them. 
     A few of  the riders appeared to be bowmen,  skilled at shooting from a  
running horse. Riding swiftly into  range they shot arrows at  the Orcs that 
straggled behind, and several of them fell; then the riders wheeled away out 
of the range of the answering  bows  of their  enemies, who shot wildly, not 
daring to halt. This  happened many  times, and on one  occasion arrows fell 
among  the Isengarders. One  of them, just  in front of Pippin, stumbled and  
did not get up again. 
     Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many Orcs had 
fallen,  but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkness the Orcs came 
to a hillock. The eaves of the forest were very near, probably  no more than 
three  furlongs  away,  but  they  could go no  further.  The  horsemen  had 
encircled them. A small band  disobeyed  Ugl®k's command, and ran on 
towards 
the forest: only three returned. 
     'Well,  here  we are,' sneered Grishnbkh. 'Fine  leadership! I hope the 

####-great Ugl®k will lead us out again.' 
     'Put  those  Halflings  down!'  ordered  Ugl®k,  taking  no  notice  of 
Grishnbkh. 'You, Lugdush, get two others  and stand guard over them! They're 
not to be killed, unless the filthy Whiteskins break through. Understand? As 
long  as I'm alive, I want 'em. But they're not to cry out, and  they're not 
to be rescued. Bind their legs!' 
     The last  part  of  the order was  carried  out mercilessly. But Pippin 
found that for the first time he was close to  Merry. The Orcs were making a  
great deal of noise,  shouting and  clashing  their weapons, and the hobbits 
managed to whisper together for a while. 
     'I don't think much of this,' said Merry. 'I feel nearly done in. Don't 
think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.' 
     'Lembas!' whispered Pippin.  'Lembas: I've got some. Have  you? I  don't  
think they've taken anything but our swords.' 
     'Yes,  I  had a packet in  my pocket,'  answered Merry, 'but it must be 
battered to crumbs. Anyway I can't put my mouth in my pocket!' 
     'You won't have to. I've--'; but just then  a savage kick warned Pippin 
that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful. 
     The night was  cold  and still. All round the knoll  on which  the  Orcs 
were gathered little watch-fires sprang up,  golden-red  in the  darkness, a  
complete ring  of them. They were within a long bowshot.  but the riders did 
not  show themselves against  the light,  and the  Orcs wasted  many  arrows 
shooting at the  fires, until Ugl®k  stopped them. The riders made no sound.  
Later  in the night when the moon came  out of the  mist,  then occasionally 
they could be seen, shadowy  shapes that glinted now and again in the  white 
light, as they moved in ceaseless patrol. 
     'They'll wait for the Sun, curse them!' growled one of the guards. 'Why 
don't we get together and charge through? What's old Ugl®k think he's doing, 
I should like to know?' 
     'I daresay you would,' snarled Ugl®k stepping up from behind.   'Meaning 
I don't think at all, eh? Curse you! You're as bad as the  other rabble: the 
maggots and the apes of Lugb®rz. No good trying  to charge with them. They'd 
just squeal  and bolt,  and  there  are  more than  enough of  these  filthy 
horse-boys to mop up our lot on the flat. 
     'There's only one thing those maggots can do: they can see like gimlets 
in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes than most Men, from 
all  I've   heard;  and  don't  forget  their  horses!   They  can  see  the 

####-night-breeze,  or  so it's  said. Still  there's  one thing the fine fellows 
don't know: Mauh®r and his lads are  in the forest, and they  should turn up 
any time now.' 
     Ugl®k's words were enough, apparently, to satisfy  the Isengarders; but 
the  other Orcs  were  both  dispirited  and  rebellious.  They posted a few 
watchers,  but  most of them lay  on  the ground,  resting  in the  pleasant 
darkness. It did indeed become very dark again; for the moon passed westward 
into thick cloud, and  Pippin could not  see anything  a few feet away.  The 
fires brought no light to the hillock. The riders were not, however, content 
merely to wait  for  the dawn and let their enemies rest. A sudden outcry on 
the  east side of the  knoll showed that something was wrong. It seemed that 
some of the Men  had ridden in  close, slipped  off their horses, crawled to 
the edge of the camp and killed several Orcs, and then had faded away again. 
Ugl®k dashed off to stop a stampede. 
     Pippin  and  Merry sat up.  Their guards,  Isengarders,  had  gone with 
Ugl®k. But  if the hobbits  had any thought of escape, it was soon dashed. A 
long hairy arm took each of them by the neck and drew  them close  together. 
Dimly they were  aware of  Grishnbkh's great head and hideous  face  between 
them; his foul breath  was on their cheeks. He began  to paw  them  and feel  
them. Pippin shuddered as hard cold fingers groped down his back. 
     'Well,  my little  ones!' said Grishnbkh  in a soft whisper.  'Enjoying 
your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed, perhaps: swords and whips 
on one side, and nasty spears on  the other! Little people should not meddle 
_in  affairs that  are too big for them.'  His  fingers continued  to grope. 
There was a light like a pale but hot fire behind his eyes. 
     The  thought came suddenly into Pippin's mind, as if caught direct from 
the urgent  thought  of his enemy:  'Grishnbkh  knows about  the  Ring! He's 
looking for it, while Ugl®k is busy: he probably wants it for himself.' Cold 
fear was in Pippin's heart,  yet at the  same time he was wondering what use 
he could make of Grishnbkh's desire. 
     'I don't think you will find it that way,' he whispered. 'It isn't easy 
to find.' 
     'Find  it? ' said Grishnbkh:  his  fingers  stopped crawling and gripped 
Pippin's shoulder. 'Find what? What are you talking about, little one?'. For  
a moment Pippin was silent. Then suddenly in the darkness he made a noise in 
his throat: gollum, gollum. 'Nothing, my precious,' he added. 
     The hobbits felt Grishnbkh's fingers  twitch. 'O ho!' hissed the goblin 

####-softly. 'That's what he means, is it? O  ho! Very ve-ry dangerous, my little 
ones.' 
     'Perhaps,' said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin's guess. 'Perhaps;  
and not only  for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it,  
or not? And what would you give for it?' 
     'Do I  want it? Do I want it?' said Grishnbkh, as if  puzzled;  but his 
arms were trembling. 'What would I give for it? What do you mean?' 
     'We  mean,'  said Pippin, choosing his  wor ds carefully,  'that it's no 
good groping in  the dark. We could save you  time and trouble. But you must  
untie our legs first, or we'll do nothing, and say nothing.' 
     'My dear tender  little fools,' hissed Grishnbkh, 'everything you have, 
and everything you  know, will be got  out of you  in due  time: everything!  
You'll wish there was more  that  you could tell to  satisfy the Questioner, 
indeed you will:  quite soon. We shan't hurry the enquiry. Oh dear no!  What 
do  you think you've  been kept alive  for? My dear  little  fellows, please 
believe me when I say that it was  not out of kindness: that's not  even one 
of Ugl®k's faults.' 
     'I find it quite  easy to  believe,' said Merry.  'But you haven't  got 
your  prey  home yet. And it doesn't seem  to  be going  your  way,  whatever  
happens. If we come  to  Isengard,  it won't  be the  great  Grishnbkh  that 
benefits: Saruman will take all  that he can find.  If you want anything for  
yourself, now's the time to do a deal.' 
     Grishnbkh  began  to  lose his  temper.  The  name  of  Saruman  seemed  
specially  to enrage him.  Time  was passing  and the disturbance was  dying 
down. Ugl®k or the Isengarders might return at any minute. 
     'Have you got it -- either of you?' he snarled. 
     'Gollum, gollum!' said Pippin. 
     'Untie our legs!' said Merry. 
     They felt the Orc's arms  trembling violently. 'Curse  you, you  filthy 
little vermin!' he hissed. 'Untie your legs? I'll untie every string in your 
bodies. Do you think I can't search you to the  bones? Search  you! I'll cut 
you both to quivering shreds. I don't need the help  of your legs to get you  
away-and have you all to myself!' 
     Suddenly  he seized them. The strength in  his  long arms and shoulders 
was  terrifying. He  tucked  them one under  each  armpit, and crushed  them 
fiercely to his sides; a great stifling hand was clapped  over each of their 
mouths. Then he sprang forward,  stooping low. Quickly and silently he went, 

####-until he  came to the edge  of the knoll. There, choosing a gap  between the 
watchers, he passed like an evil shadow out into the  night, down  the slope 
and away westward  towards the river that  flowed out of the forest. In that 
direction there was a wide open space with only one fire. 
     After going  a  dozen yards he  halted,  peering and listening. Nothing 
could be  seen or heard. He crept  slowly  on, bent almost  double. Then  he 
squatted and listened  again. Then he stood up, as if to risk a sudden dash. 
At that very moment the  dark form of a  rider loomed up  right  in front of 
him. A horse snorted and reared. A man called out. 
     Grishnbkh flung himself on the ground flat,  dragging the hobbits under  
him; then he drew his sword.  No doubt he meant to kill his captives, rather  
than allow them  to escape or to  be rescued;  but  it  was his undoing. The 
sword  rang faintly, and glinted a  little in the light of the fire away  to 
his left. An arrow came whistling out of the gloom: it was aimed with skill, 
or guided by fate, and it pierced his right hand. He dr opped the  sword  and 
shrieked. There was a quick beat of hoofs, and  even as  Grishnbkh leaped up 
and  ran,  he  was ridden down and  a spear  passed through  him.  He gave a  
hideous shivering cry and lay still. 
     The hobbits remained flat on  the  ground, as  Grishnbkh had left them. 
Another  horseman came riding swiftly  to his comrade's aid. Whether because 
of some special keenness of sight, or because of some other sense, the horse 
lifted  and sprang lightly over them; but its rider did  not see them, lying 
covered in their elven-cloaks, too crushed for the moment, and too afraid to 
move. 
     At  last  Merry stirred and whispered softly: 'So  far so good: but how 
are we to avoid being spitted?' 
     The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grishnbkh  had  roused 
the Orcs. From the yells  and screeches that came from the knoll the hobbits 
guessed  that their  disappearance had been discovered:  Ugl®k  was probably 
knocking  off  a  few  more  heads.  Then suddenly  the answering  cries  of 
orc-voices came from the  right, outside the circle of watch-fires, from the 
direction of the forest and the mountains. Mauh®r had apparently arrived and 
was attacking the besiegers. There was  the sound  of galloping  horses. The 
Riders  were  drawing  in  their  ring  close  round the  knoll, risking the 
orc-arrows, so as  to prevent any sortie, while a company  rode off to  deal 
with the newcomers.  Suddenly Merry and Pippin realized  that without moving 
they were now outside the circle: there was nothing between them and escape. 

####-     'Now,' said Merry,  'if only we had our legs  and hands free,  we might 
get away. But I can't touch the knots, and I can't bite them.' 
     'No need to  try,'  said Pippin. 'I was going to tell you: I've managed 
to free  my  hands. These loops are only  left for show. You'd better have a  
bit of lembas first.' 
     He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. The cakes 
were broken, but good,  still in their leaf-wrappings. The  hobbits each ate 
two  or three  pieces.  The  taste brought  back  to them the memory of fair 
faces,  and laughter, and wholesome food in  quiet  days now far away. For a 
while they ate thoughtfully, sitting in the dark, heedless  of the cries and 
sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was the first to come back to the present. 
     'We must be off,' he said. 'Half a moment!' Grishnbkh's sword was lying 
close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to use; so he crawled 
forward, and finding the body of the goblin  he  drew from its sheath a long 
sharp knife. With this he quickly cut their bonds.  
     'Now for it!' he said. 'When we've warmed up a bit, perhaps we shall be 
able  to stand again, and  walk.  But  in any case  we  had better start  by 
crawling.' 
     They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped them: but 
it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-fire a wide  berth,  and 
wormed their way  forward bit  by  bit, until  they came to the edge  of the 
river, gurgling away in  the black shadows under its deep   banks. Then  they 
looked back. 
     The sounds  had  died away.  Evidently  Mauh®r  and his 'lads' had been 
killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent ominous vigil. 
It would not last very much longer. Already  the night was old. In the East, 
which had remained unclouded, the sky was beginning to grow pale. 
     'We must get under cover,' said  Pippin, 'or we  shall be seen. It will 
not  be any  comfort  to us, if  these riders discover that we are  not Orcs 
after we are dead.' He got up and stamped his feet. 'Those cords have cut me 
like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What 
about you, Merry?' 
     Merry got up. 'Yes,' he said, 'I can  manage it. Lembas does put  heart 
into  you! A more  wholesome sort  of  feeling, too, than  the heat  of that 
orc-draught.  I  wonder  what it was made of. Better not to  know, I expect. 
Let's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!' 
     'Not here, the banks are too steep,' said Pippin. 'Forward now!' 

####-     They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the river. 
Behind them the light grew in the East. As they  walked they compared notes,  
talking  lightly in  hobbit-fashion of the things  that  had happened  since 
their capture. No listener would  have guessed from their words that they had 
suffered cruelly, and been in dire peril, going without hope towards torment  
and death; or that even now, as they knew  well,  they had  little chance of 
ever finding friend or safety again. 
     'You seem to  have been doing well, Master Took,' said Merry.  'You will 
get  almost  a chapter in old Bilbo's book, if ever I get a chance to report 
to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy villain's little game, and 
playing up to him. But I wonder if anyone will  ever pick up your trail  and 
find that brooch. I should hate to lose mine, but I am afraid  yours is gone 
for good. 
     'I  shall have  to brush up my  toes,  if I am to  get level  with you. 
Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now. This is wher e he comes in. I 
don't  suppose  you have much notion  where we are;  but I spent  my time at 
Rivendell rather better. We are walking west along the Entwash. The butt-end 
of the Misty Mountains is in front, and Fangorn Forest.' 
     Even as he spoke the da rk edge of the  forest loomed up straight before 
them. Night seemed to have taken refuge under its great trees, creeping away 
from the coming Dawn. 
     'Lead on, Master  Brandybuck!' said Pippin. 'Or lead back! We have been 
warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have forgotten that.' 
     'I have  not,' answered Merry; 'but the forest seems better to  me, all 
the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.' 
     He  led the way  in under the  huge branches  of  the trees. Old beyond 
guessing, they  seemed. Great  trailing  beards of lichen  hung  from  them, 
blowing and swaying in  the breeze. Out of the  shadows the  hobbits peeped, 
gazing back down the slope: little  furtive  figures  that in the  dim light 
looked like elf-children  in the deeps  of time peering out of the Wild Wood  
in wonder at their first Dawn. 
     Far  over the  Great  River,  and the  Brown  Lands,  leagues upon grey 
leagues away, the Dawn came,  red as flame.  Loud rang the hunting-horns  to 
greet it.  The Rider s of Rohan sprang suddenly  to life. Horn  answered horn 
again. 
     Merry and  Pippin heard,  clear  in  the  cold  air,  the  neighing  of 
war-horses, and  the  sudden singing of many men. The Sun's limb was lifted, 

####-an  arc of  fire,  above the margin of the world. Then with a great  cry the 
Riders charged from  the East; the red  light gleamed on mail and spear. The 
Orcs yelled  and shot all the arrows that remained to  them. The hobbits saw 
several horsemen fall; but their line held on up  the hill  and  over it, and 
wheeled round and charged  again. Most  of the raiders that were  left alive 
then broke and fled, this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But 
one band, holding together in a black wedge, drove forward resolutely in the  
direction  of  the  forest.  Straight up the slope they charged  towards the 
watchers. Now they were drawing near,  and it seemed certain that they would 
escape: they had already hewn down three Riders that barred their way. 
     'We have watched too long,' said Merry. 'There's Ugl®k! I don't want to 
meet him again.' The hobbits turned and  fled deep into the  shadows of  the 
wood. 
     So it  was  that  they did not sec  the  last  stand,  when  Ugl®k  was 
overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn. There he was slain 
at last by Jomer,  the Third Marshal  of the Mark, who dismounted and fought 
him  sword to sword.  And over  the  wide fields the keen-eyed Riders hunted 
down the few Orcs that had escaped and still had strength to fly. 
     Then when they had  laid their fallen comrades in a  mound and had sung 
their praises, the Riders made a great fire and scattered the ashes of their 
enemies.  So ended  the raid, and no  news  of  it came ever back either  to 
Mordor or to Isengard; but the smoke of  the burning rose high to heaven and 
was seen by many watchful eyes.  
 

####-<h4>Chapter 4.</h4> <br> Treebeard 

 
 
     Meanwhile the hobbits went with  as much speed as  the dark and tangled  
forest allowed, following  the line of the  running  stream, westward and up 
towards the slopes of the mountains, deeper and deeper into  Fangorn. Slowly 
their fear of the Orcs died away, and their pace slackened. A queer stifling 
feeling came  over  them,  as  if the air were  too thin or too  scanty  for  
breathing. 
     At last Merry halted.  'We can't go on like this,' he  panted.  'I want 
some air.' 
     'Let's have  a  drink  at any rate,'  said  Pippin. 'I'm  parched.'  He 
clambered on to a  great tree-root that  wound  down  into the  stream,  and 
stooping drew up some water in his cupped hands. It was clear and  cold, and 
he  took many draughts.  Merry followed  him.  The water refreshed them  and 
seemed  to cheer their hearts; for a while they sat together on the brink of 
the  stream,  dabbling  their  sore feet and legs, and peering round at  the 
trees that  stood silently about them, rank upon rank, until they faded away 
into grey twilight in every direction. 
     'I suppose you  haven't  lost us already?'  said  Pippin,  leaning back  
against  a great tree-trunk.  'We  can  at  least follow the  course of this 
stream, the Entwash or whatever you call  it, and get  out again  the way we 
came.' 
     'We could, if  our legs  would  do it,' said  Merry;  'and if  we could 
breathe properly.' 
     'Yes, it is  all  very  dim,  and stuffy,  in   here,' said Pippin.  'It 
reminds me, somehow, of the  old room in the  Great Place of  the Tooks away 
back in the  Smials at Tuckborough:  a huge place,  where  the furniture has 
never been moved or changed for generations. They say  the Old Took lived in 
it  year  after  year,  while  he  and  the  room  got  older  and  shabbier  
together -and  it has  never changed since  he  died, a century ago.  And Old 
Gerontius was my great-great-grandfather: that  puts it back a bit. But that 
is  nothing  to the old feeling of  this  wood.  Look at  all those weeping, 
trailing,  beards and whiskers of lichen! And  most of the trees seem  to be 
half covered with ragged dry  leaves that have never fallen. Untidy. I can't  
imagine what spring  would look  like here, if  i t ever comes; still  less a  
spring-cleaning.' 

####-     'But the Sun at any  rate must peep in sometimes.' said Merry. 'It does 
not look or feel at all like Bilbo's  description of Mirkwood.  That was all 
dark and black,  and the home  of dark black  things. This is just dim,  and 
frightfully  tree-ish.  You  can't imagine animals  living here  at all,  or 
staying for long.' 
     'No, nor hobbits,' said Pippin. 'And I don't like the thought of trying 
to get through  it  either.  Nothing to cat  for a  hundred  miles, I should 
guess. How are our supplies?' 
     'Low,'  said Merry.  'We ran  off  with nothing but a  couple of  spare 
packets  of  lembas, and  left everything else behind.' They  looked at what 
remained of the  elven-cakes:  broken  fragments for abou t five meagre days, 
that  was all. 'And not a wrap or a blanket,' said Merry.  'We shall be cold 
tonight, whichever way we go.' 
     'Well, we'd  better decide on  the way now,' said  Pippin. 'The morning 
must be getting on.' 
     Just then they became  aware of a yellow light that  had appeared, some 
way further  on into the  wood: shafts  of sunlight seemed  suddenly to have  
pierced the forest -roof. 
     'Hullo!' said Merry.  'The Sun must have run into a cloud  while  we've 
been under these  trees, and now she  has  run  out  again; or  else she has 
climbed high enough to look down through some opening. It isn't far let's go 
and investigate!' 
     They  found  it was  further than  they thought. The  ground was rising 
steeply  still,  and  it was becoming  increasingly stony.  The  light  grew 
broader as they went on, and soon they saw that there was a rock -wall before 
them: the side of a hill, or the abrupt end of  some long root thrust out by 
the distant mountains.  No trees grew on it, and the sun was falling full on 
its stony face. The twigs of the trees at  its foot were stretched out stiff 
and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. Where  all had looked so shabby 
and grey before, the wood now gleamed with rich browns, and with the  
smooth 
black-greys  of bark  like polished leather.  The boles of the trees  glowed 
with a soft green like young grass: early spring or  a fleeting vision of it 
was about them. 
     In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: natural 
perhaps, and  made by the weathering  and splitting  of the rock, for it was 
rough and uneven. High up, almost level with the tops of forest -trees, there 

####-was a shelf under a cliff. Nothing grew there but a few grasses and weeds at 
its edge, and  one old stump of a tree  with only two bent branches left: it 
looked almost  like the figure  of some gnarled  old  man,  standing  there, 
blinking in the morning-light. 
     'Up  we go!' said Merry joyfully. 'Now for a breath of air, and a sight 
of the land!' 
     They climbed  and scrambled up the rock. If the  stair had been made it 
was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. They were  too eager to  be 
surprised at the  remarkable  way  in  which the  cuts  and  sores of  their 
captivity  had healed and their  vigour had returned. They came at length to 
the edge  of the shelf almost at the feet of the old stump; then they sprang 
up  and  turned  round  with their backs  to the  hill, breathing  deep, and 
looking  out eastward. They saw  that they had  only come some three or four 
miles  into the  forest:  the heads  of the  trees marched  down  the slopes 
towards the  plain. There, near the fringe  of  the forest,  tall spires  of 
curling black smoke went up, wavering and floating towards them. 
     'The wind's changing,'  said Merry.  'It's  turned east again. It feels 
cool up here.' 
     'Yes,'  said Pippin; 'I'm  afraid this is only a passing  gleam, and it 
will  all go grey  again. What a  pity! This  shaggy  old  forest  looked so 
different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked the place.' 
     'Almost felt you liked the  Forest! That's good! That's uncommonly kind 
of you,' said  a strange voice.  'Turn round and let  me have a look at your 
faces. I almost feel that  I dislike you  both, but do  not let us be hasty. 
Turn round!' A large knob-knuckled hand was laid on each of their shoulders,  
and they  were twisted round,  gently but irresistibly; then  two great arms 
lifted them up. 
     They  found that they  were looking  at a  most extraordinary face.  It 
belonged to a  large  Man-like, almost Troll-like, figure, at least fourteen 
foot high,  very sturdy, with a tall  head,  and hardly any neck. Whether it 
was clad in stuff like green  and grey  bark, or  whether that was its hide, 
was  difficult to say. At any  rate the  arms, at a short distance from  the 
trunk, were not wrinkled,  but covered  with a brown smooth skin.  The large 
feet had seven toes each. The lower part of the long face was covered with a  
sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost twiggy  at the roots,  thin and mossy  at 
the  ends. But  at  the moment the hobbits noted little but the eyes.  These 
deep  eyes  were now  surveying them, slow and solemn, but very penetrating. 

####-They were brown, shot  with a green light. Often  afterwards Pippin tried to 
describe his first impression of them. 
     'One felt  as if there was an enormous well behind them, filled up with 
ages of  memory  and long, slow,  steady  thinking;  but  their surface  was 
sparkling with  the present: like sun shimmering on the  outer  leaves of  a  
vast tree, or on the ripples of a very deep lake.  I don't know but it  felt 
as  if  something  that grew  in the  ground-asleep, you might say, or  just  
feeling itself  as  something between  roof-tip  and leaf-tip, between  deep 
earth  and sky had suddenly waked up, and was  considering you with the same 
slow care that it had given to its own inside affairs for endless years.' 
     'Hrum, Hoom,'  murmured  the  voice,  a deep  voice  like a  very  deep 
woodwind  instrument. 'Very odd indeed! Do  not  be hasty, that is my motto. 
But if I had seen you,  before I heard your voices-I liked them: nice little 
voices: they reminded me of something I cannot  remember ---if I had seen you  
before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, taking you for little 
Orcs, and found out my mistake  afterwards. Very odd  you  are, indeed. Root 
and twig, very odd!' 
     Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those eyes he 
felt a curious suspense, but  not fear. 'Please.' he said, 'who are you? And 
what are you?' 
     A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep wells 
were covered over.  'Hrum, now,' answered the voice;  'well,  I am an Ent, or  
that's  what  they call me.  Yes, Ent is the word. The Ent, I am,  you might 
say,  in your  manner  of  speaking. Fangorn is  my name according to  some, 
Treebeard others make it. Treebeard will do.' 
     'An Ent?' said  Merry.  'What's  that? But  what do you  call yourself?  
What's your real name?' 
     'Hoo now!' replied  Treebeard. 'Hoo! Now that would be  telling! Not so 
hasty.  And I  am doing the  asking. You are  in my country. What are you,  I  
wonder? I cannot place you. You do not  seem to come in the old lists that I  
learned when I was young. But  that was a long, long time ago, and  they may 
have made new lists. Let me see! Let me see! How did it go?  
     Learn now the lore of Living Creatures! 
     First name the four, the free peoples: 
     Eldest of all, the elf-children; 
     Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses; 
     Ent the earthborn, old as mountains; 

####-     Man the mortal, master of horses: 
     Hm, hm, hm. 
     Beaver the builder, buck the leaper, 
     Bear bee-hunter, boar the fighter; 
     Hound is hungry, hare is fearful... 
     hm, hm. 
     Eagle in eyrie, ox in pasture, 
     Hart horn-crowned; hawk is swiftest 
     Swan the whitest, serpent coldest... 
     Hoom, hm; hoom. hm. how did it go? Room tum, room tum, roomty toom 
tum. 
It was a long list. But anyway you do not seem to fit in anywhere!' 
     'We  always seem  to have got   left out of the  old lists, and the  old 
stories,' said  Merry.  'Yet we've been about for quite a long  time.  We're 
hobbits.' 
     'Why not make a new line?' said Pippin. 
     'Half-grown hobbits, the hole -dwellers. 
     Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you've got 
it.' 
     'Hm! Not bad, not bad,' said Treebeard.  'That would do. So you live in 
holes, eh? It  sounds very right and proper. Who calls  you hobbits, though?  
That does not sound elvish to me. Elves made all  the old   words: they began 
it.' 
     'Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,' said Pippin. 
     'Hoom, hmm! Come  now!  Not so hasty!  You call yourselves hobbits? But 
you should not go telling just anybody. You'll be letting out your own right 
names if you're not careful.' 
     'We aren't careful about  that,' said Merry. 'As a matter of fact I'm a  
Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me just Merry.' 
     'And I'm a Took, Peregrin Took,  but  I'm generally called  Pippin,  or  
even Pip.' 
     'Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,' said Treebeard. 'I  am honoured by 
your confidence; but you should not be too free all at once.  There are Ents 
and  Ents, you know; or there  are Ents and things that look like  Ents  but 
ain't, as you  might say. I'll call you  Merry and Pippin if you please-nice 
names. For I am not going to tell you my name, not yet at any rate.' A queer  
half-knowing,  half-humorous look came with  a green flicker into his  eyes.  

####-'For one thing it would  take a long while: my name is growing all the time, 
and I've lived a  very  long, long time; so my  name is like  a story.  Real 
names tell you the story of the things they belong to in my language, in the 
Old  Entish  as you might say. It is a lovely  language, but it takes a very 
long  time to say  anything in it, because  we do  not  say anything  in it. 
unless it is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to. 
     'But  now,' and  the  eyes became very bright and 'present', seeming to 
grow smaller and almost sharp, 'what is  going  on? What are you doing in it  
all? I can see and hear  (and smell and feel) a great deal from  this,  from 
this, from this  a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-bur®ml. Excuse me: that 
is a part of my name for it; I do not know what  the word is  in the outside 
languages: you know, the thing we are on, where I stand and look out on fine 
mornings, and  think about  the Sun, and the grass beyond the wood,  and the 
horses, and the clouds, and the  unfolding of the world. What  is going  on?  
What is Gandalf up  to? And these -- burbrum,' he made a deep rumbling noise 
like a discord on a great organ --  'these Orcs, and young Saruman  down  at 
Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.' 
     'There is quite a lot going on,' said Merry:  'and even if we tried  to 
be quick, it  would  take a  long time to tell.  But you  told  us not to be 
hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we  
asked what you are  going to do with us, and  which side you are on? And did 
you know Gandalf?' 
     'Yes, I do know  him: the only wizard that really cares  about  trees ' 
said Treebeard. 'Do you know him?' 
     'Yes,'  said Pippin  sadly, 'we did. He  was a great friend, and he was 
our guide.' 
     'Then I  can answer your other  questions,' said  Treebeard. 'I  am not 
going to do anything with you: not if you mean by that 'do something  to you ' 
without your  leave. We might  do  some things together. I don't  know about 
sides. I go my own way; but your way may go along with mine for a while. But 
you speak of Master  Gandalf,  as if he was  in a story that had come  to an 
end.' 
     'Yes, we do,' said Pippin sadly. 'The story seems to be going on, but I 
am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.' 
     'Hoo,  come  now!'  said  Treebeard.   'Hoom, hm, ah  well.'  He paused, 
looking long at the hobbits: 'Hoom, ah, well I do not know what to say. Come 
now!' 

####-     'If you  would like to hear more. said Merry, 'we will tell you. But it 
will take some time. Wouldn't you like to put us  down? Couldn't we sit here 
together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting tired of holding us 
up.' 
     'Hm,  tired? No. I am not tired. I do not easily get tired. And I do not 
sit down. I am not very. hm, bendable. But there.  the  Sun is  going in. Let 
us leave this  -- did you say what you call it?' 
     'Hill?' suggested Pippin. 'Shelf? Step?' suggested Merry. 
     Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. 'Hill. Yes, that was it. But 
it is a hasty word  for  a thing that has stood here ever since this part of 
the world was shaped. Never mind. Let us leave it, and go.' 
     'Where shall we go?' asked Merry. 
     'To my home, or one of my homes,' answered Treebeard. 
     'Is it far?' 
     'I do not  know.  You might  call it far, perhaps.  But what does  tha t 
matter?' 
     'Well,  you see, we have lost all our belongings,' said Merry. 'We have 
only a little food.' 
     'O!  Hm! You need not  trouble about that,' said Treebeard. 'I can give 
you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long, long while. And 
if we decide to part company, I can  set you down outside my  country at any 
point you choose. Let us go!' 
     Holding the hobbits gently but firmly, one  in  the crook of each  arm, 
Treebeard lifted up first one large foot and then the  other, and  moved them 
to the  edge  of  the  shelf. The  rootlike  toes grasped  the  rocks.  Then 
carefully  and solemnly, he  stalked down from step to step, and reached the 
floor of the Forest. 
     At once he set off with  long  deliberate strides  through  the  trees, 
deeper  and  deeper into  the  wood, never  far  from  the  stream, climbing 
steadily up  towards  the slopes of the mountains. Many of the  trees seemed 
asleep, or as unaware of him as of any other creature that merely passed by;  
but  some quivered, and some  raised up  their branches above his head as he 
approached.  All  the  while, as he walked, he  talked to  himself in a long 
running stream of musical sounds.  
     The hobbits  were silent for some time. They  felt, oddly  enough, safe 
and  comfortable, and they had a great deal  to think and wonder  about.  At  
last Pippin ventured to speak again. 

####-     'Please, Treebeard,' he said,  'could I  ask  you  something?  Why  did 
Celeborn  warn  us  against  your forest?  He  told us  not to  risk getting 
entangled in it.' 
     'Hmm,  did he now?' rumbled  Treebeard. 'And I might have said much the 
same, if you had been going the other way. Do  not risk getting entangled in 
the  woods of  Laurelindurenan ! That  is what the Elves used to call it, but 
now they  make the  name  shorter: Lothlurien they call it. Perhaps they are 
right: maybe it is fading;  not growing. Land of the Valley of Singing Gold, 
that was it, once upon a time. Now it is the Dreamflower. Ah well! But it is 
a queer  place, and  not for just any one to venture in. I am surprised that 
you ever got out, but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not 
happened to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land. 
     'And  so is  this. Folk have  come  to grief here. Aye, they  have ,  to 
grief.  Laurelindurenan lindelorendor malinornjlion ornemalin ,' he hummed to 
himself. 'They are falling rather  behind  the world in  there, I guess,' he 
said 'Neither  this country, nor anything else  outside the Golden  Wood, is 
what it was when Celeborn was young. Still: 
     Taurelilumla-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurla Lumlanor,1 
     that is what  they used to say.  Things have  changed, but it is  still 
true in places.' 
     'What do you mean?' said Pippin. 'What is true?' 
     'The trees and the Ents,' said Treebeard. 'I do not understand all that 
goes  on myself, so I cannot explain it  to  you. Some of us are  still true 
Ents, and  lively enough  in our fashion, but many are growing sleepy, going 
tree-ish, as you might say. Most of the trees are ju st trees, of course; but 
many are half  awake. Some  are quite wide awake, and a  few are,  well, ah,  
well getting Entish. That is going on all the time. 
     'When that happens to  a  tree,  you find that  some have  bad  hearts.  
Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew some good old 
willows  down  the Entwash, gone  long ago,  alas!  They were  quite hollow, 
indeed  they were falling all to pieces, but as quiet and  sweet-spoken as a  
young  leaf.  And  then  there are  some  trees  in  the  valleys  under the 
mountains, sound as a bell, and bad right through.  That sort of thing seems 
to spread. There used to be some very dangerous parts in this country. There 
are still some very black patches.' 
     'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?' asked Merry. 
     'Aye, aye. something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there is some 

####-shadow of the Great Darkness  lying there still away north; and bad memories 
are handed down. But there are hollow dales in this land where the  Darkness 
has never been lifted, and the trees are older  than I am. Still, we do what 
we can. We keep off strangers and the  foolhardy; and we train and we teach, 
we walk and we weed. 
     'We are tree-herds, we old  Ents. Few  enough of us are left now. Sheep 
get  like shepherd, and shepherds like  sheep, it is said;  but  slowly, and 
neither have  long in the world. It  is quicker and  closer with  trees  and 
Ents, and they walk down the  ages  together. For Ents are more like  Elves:  
less interested  in   themselves than Men are,  and  better at getting inside 
other things.  And yet again  Ents are more like Men,  more  changeable than 
Elves are, and  quicker at taking the colour of the outside,  you might say.  
Or  better than both:  for they are steadier a nd keep their  minds on things 
longer. 'Some of my kin look just  like trees now, and need something  great 
to  rouse them; and they speak  only in whispers. But  some  of my trees are 
limb-lithe, and many can talk to me. Elves began it, of course, waking trees 
up  and  teaching  them to speak and  learning their  tree-talk. They always 
wished to talk to everything, the old Elves did. But then the Great Darkness 
came, and they passed away  over the Sea, or fled into far  valleys, and hid 
themselves,  and made  songs  about days that would never come again.  Never 
again. Aye,  aye, there was all  one wood once upon a time: from here to the 
Mountains of Lune, and this was just the East End. 
     'Those were the broad days! Time was when I could walk and sing a ll day 
and  hear no more  than  the echo of my own  voice in the hollow hills.  The 
woods were like the woods of Lothlurien. only thicker stronger, younger. And 
the smell of the air! I used to spend a week just breathing.' 
     Treebeard  fell silent, striding along, and yet  making  hardly a sound 
with his great feet. Then he began to hum again, and passed into a murmuring 
chant. Gradually the hobbits became aware that he was chanting to them: 
     In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring. 
     Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion! 
     And I said that was good. 
     I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand. 
     Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir! 
     And I thought that was best. 
     To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn. 
     Ah!  the  gold and the red  and the sighing of leaves  in the Autumn in  

####-Taur-na-neldor! 
     It was more than my desire. 
     To the pine-trees upon the  highland of  Dorthonion  I climbed  in  the 
Winter. 
     Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black  branches  of  Winter upon 
Orod-na-Thfn! 
     My voice went up and sang in the sky. 
     And now all those lands lie under the wave. 
     And I walk in Ambaruna, in Tauremorna, in Aldaluml. 
     In my own land, in the country of Fangorn, 
     Where the roots are long, 
     And the years lie thicker than the leaves 
     In Tauremornaluml. 
     He  ended, and strode on silently, and in all  the wood, as far  as ear 
could reach, there was not a sound. 
     The day  waned,  and dusk was twined about  the boles of  the trees. At  
last  the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark land: they had 
come to the feet of the mountains, and to the green roots of tall Methedras.  
Down the hillside  the young Entwash,  leaping  from its springs  high above,  
ran noisily from step to step to meet them. On the right of the stream there 
was  a long slope, clad with grass, now  grey in the twilight. No trees grew 
there  and  it  was  open  to  the sky;  stars were shining already in lakes 
between shores of cloud.  
     Treebeard  strode  up the slope,  hardly  slackening his pace. Suddenly 
before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees stood there, one 
on  either side, like living gate-posts; bu t  there was  no gate  save their 
crossing and interwoven boughs. As  the old Ent approached, the trees lifted 
up their branches, and all  their leaves quivered and rustled. For they were 
evergreen trees, and their leaves were dark and polished, and gleamed in the 
twilight. Beyond them was a wide level space, as though the floor of a great 
hall had been cut  in the side of the hill. On either hand the  walls sloped 
upwards, until they were fifty feet high  or more, and along each wall stood 
an aisle of trees that also increased in height as they marched inwards.  
     At the far end the rock -wall was sheer,  but at  the bottom it had been 
hollowed back into a  shallow bay with an arched roof: the only roof of  the 
hall, save the branches  of  the trees, which  at the inner end overshadowed 
all the ground leaving only a broad open path in the middle. A little stream 

####-escaped from  the springs above,  and leaving the main  water, fell tinkling 
down  the  sheer face  of the wall, pouring in silver  drops,  like  a   fine 
curtain  in front  of the arched bay. The water was  gathered  again into  a  
stone basin in the floor between the trees, and thence it spilled and flowed 
away beside the open path, out  to rejoin the Entwash in its journey through 
the forest. 
     'Hm! Here we are!' said Treebeard, breaking his  long silence.  'I have 
brought you about  seventy  thousand  ent-strides, but what that comes to in 
the measurement of your land I do not know. Anyhow we are near the roots  of 
the  Last Mountain.  Part of the name of this place might be Wellinghall, if 
it were turned into your language. I like it. We will stay here tonight.' He 
set them  down  on  the  grass  between  the aisles  of the  trees, and they 
followed  him  towards the great arch. The  hobbits  now  noticed that as he 
walked his  knees  hardly bent, but  his  legs opened in  a great stride. He 
planted  his big toes (and they  were indeed  big, and very  broad)  on  the 
ground first, before any other part of his feet. 
     For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling  spring, and 
took a deep breath;  then he laughed, and passed inside. A great stone table 
stood there, but  no chairs. At  the back of the  bay  it was already  quite 
dark. Treebeard lifted two  great  vessels and stood them on the table. They 
seemed to  be  filled with water;  but he  held  his  hands over  them,  and 
immediately they began to glow,  one with a golden and the other with a rich 
green light; and  the blending of the two lights lit the bay; as  if the sun 
of  summer  was  shining through a roof of young  leaves. Looking back,  the 
hobbits saw that the trees in  the court had also begun to glow,  faintly at 
first, but steadily quickening, until  every leaf was edged with light: some 
green,  some gold, some red as  copper; while  the  tree-trunks  looked like 
pillars moulded out of luminous stone. 
     'Well, well, now we can talk again,' said Treebeard. 'You are thirsty I 
expect. Perhaps you are also tired. Drink this!' He went to the  back of the 
bay, and  then they saw that several tall stone jars stood there, with heavy 
lids. He removed  one of the lids, and dipped  in a great ladle, and with it 
filled three bowls, one very large bowl, and two smaller ones.  
     'This is an ent-house,' he said, 'and there are no seats, I  fear.  But 
you may sit on the table.'  Picking  up the hobbits he set them on the great 
stone  slab, six feet  above the  ground, and there they  sat dangling their 
legs, and drinking in sips. 

####-     The  drink was  like water, indeed very like  the taste of the draughts 
they had drunk from the  Entwash near, the borders  of the  forest,  and yet 
there was  some scent or savour in  it which they could not describe: it was 
faint, but it reminded them of  the smell of a distant wood borne  from afar 
by a cool breeze at night. The effect of the  draught began at the toes, and 
rose  steadily  through every limb, bringing  refreshment  and vigour  as it 
coursed upwards, right to the tips of the hair. Indeed the hobbits felt that 
the  hair  on  their heads was actually standing up,  waving and curling and 
growing. As for Treebeard, he first laved his feet  in the basin beyond  the 
arch, and then he  drained his bowl at one draught, one long, slow  draught. 
The hobbits thought he would never stop. 
     At last he  set the bowl down again. 'Ah -- ah,' he sighed. 'Hm,  hoom, 
now we can talk easier. You can sit on the floor, and  I will lie down; that 
will prevent this drink from rising to my head and sending me to sleep.' 
     On the right side of  the  bay there  was a great bed on low legs;  not 
more than a couple of feet high,  covered  deep in dried grass  and bracken. 
Treebeard lowered himself slowly on to this (with only the slightest sign of 
bending at his  middle),  until he lay at full  length, with his arms behind 
his head, looking up at the ceiling. upon which lights were flickering, like 
the  play of leaves  in the sunshine. Merry  and Pippin  sat  beside him  on 
pillows of grass.  
     'Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry!' said Treebeard. 
     The hobbits began to tell him the story of their  adventures ever since 
they left Hobbiton. They followed  no very clear order, for they interrupted 
one another continually, and Treebeard often stopped the  speaker, and  went 
back to some earlier point, or  jumped forward asking questions  about later  
events. They said  nothing whatever about the Ring, and did not tell him why 
they set  out or  where they  were going to;  and he  did not  ask  for  any 
reasons.  
     He  was  immensely interested in  everything: in  the  Black Riders, in 
Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and  Tom Bombadil, in the Mines of 
Moria, and in Lothlurien  and Galadriel. He made them describe the Shire and 
its country over and over  again. He  said an odd thing at  this point.  'You 
never see any, hm, any Ents round  there do you?' he asked. 'Well, not Ents,  
Entwives I should really say.' 
     'Entwives?' said Pippin. 'Are they like you at all?' 
     Yes,  hm,  well   no:  I  do  not  really  know   now,  said  Treebeard 

####-thoughtfully. 'But they would like your country, so I just wondered.' 
     Treebeard  was  however   especially  interested   in  everything  that 
concerned Gandalf;  and  most  interested of  all  in Saruman's  doings. The 
hobbits  regretted  very much that  they  knew so little  about them: only a  
rather  vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told  the Council.  But they  
were clear  at  any rate that  Ugl®k and  his troop  came from Isengard, and 
spoke of Saruman as their master. 
     'Hm, hoom!'  said  Treebeard,  when at last  their story  had wound and 
wandered  down to the battle of the Orcs  and  the Riders  of Rohan.  'Well, 
well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You have not told me  all, no 
indeed, not by a long way. But I do not doubt that you a re  doing as Gandalf 
would wish. There is something very  big going on, that I can see, and  what 
it is maybe I shall learn  in good time, or in bad time. By  root  and twig, 
but  it  is a strange business: up sprout a  little folk that are not in the 
old lists,  and behold  the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and 
Gandalf takes them  on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras 
Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the  leagues  of Wilderland:  indeed 
they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they weather it!' 
     'And what about yourself?' asked Merry. 
     'Hoom, hm, I have not troubled  about the  Great Wars,' said Treebeard; 
'they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business of Wizards: Wizards 
are always troubled  about the future.  I  do not like  worrying  about  the 
future. I am not  altogether on anybody's side, because nobody is altogether  
on my  side, if you understand me: nobody cares  for the woods as I care for  
them, not even  Elves nowadays. Still,  I  take more kindly to Elves than  to 
others: it was the Elves that cured us of  dumbness long ago, and that was a  
great gift that cannot be forgotten, though our  ways have parted since. And 
there are  some things, of  course, whose side I am altogether not  on; I am 
against  them altogether: these -- burbrum' (he again  made a deep rumble of 
disgust)' -- these Orcs, and their masters.  
     'I  used to  be  anxious  when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but when  it 
removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while : Mordor is a long way away. 
But it seems that the wind is setting  East,  and the withering of all woods 
may  be  drawing near.  There is naught that an old Ent can  do to hold back  
that storm: he must weather it or crack. 
     'But Saruman now! Saruman is a neighbour: I cannot overlook him. I must  
do something. I suppose. I have often wondered lately what I should do about 

####-Saruman.' 
     'Who is  Saruman?'  asked  Pippin.  'Do  you know  anything  about  his 
history?'  'Saruman is  a  Wizard,' answered Treebeard.  'More  than  that I 
cannot say. I do not know the history of Wizards. They  appeared first after  
the Great Ships came over the Sea; but if they came with  the Ships  I never  
can tell. Saruman was  reckoned great among them.  I  believe.  He  gave  up 
wandering  about and minding the  affairs of Men and Elves, some time ago -- 
you would call it a very long time ago: and he settled down at Angrenost, or  
Isengard  as the Men of Rohan call  it. He was very quiet to begin with, but 
his fame began to gr ow. He was  chosen to be head of the White Council, they 
say; but that did not turn out too well. I wonder now  if even  then Saruman 
was not turning to evil ways. But at any  rate he used to give no trouble to 
his neighbours. I used to talk to him.  There was a time when  he was always 
walking about my woods. He was polite in  those days, always asking my leave 
(at  least when he  met me); and always  eager  to  listen. I told him  many 
things that he would never have found out by himself; but he never repaid me 
in like kind. I  cannot remember that he ever told.  me anything. And he got 
more and more like that; his face, as I remember  it-I  have not seen it for  
many  a  day-became  like windows  in  a stone  wall: windows with  shutters 
inside. 
     'I think  that I now understand  what he is  up  to. He  is plotting to 
become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels;  and he does not care for  
growing things, except as far as they serve him for the  moment.  And now it 
is clear that he is a  black traitor. He has taken up  with  foul folk, with 
the Orcs. Brm,  hoom! Worse than that: he  has been doing something to them; 
something dangerous. For these Isengarders are more like wicked Men. It is a 
mark of evil things that came in the Great  Darkness  that they cannot abide 
the Sun;  but Saruman's  Orcs  can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder  
what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of 
Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!' 
     Treebeard  rumbled for a moment, as if he  were pronouncing some  deep, 
subterranean Entish malediction. 'Some  time ago I began to wonder  how Orcs 
dared to pass  through my woods so  freely,'  he went on. 'Only lately did I 
guess that  Saruman was to blame, and that  long ago he had been spying  out 
all the ways, and discovering  my secrets. He and his  foul folk are  making 
havoc now. Down on the borders  they are  felling  trees-good trees. Some of 
the trees they just cut down and leave to rot -- orc-mischief that; but most  

####-are hewn up and  carried off to feed  the fires of Orthanc. There is always a  
smoke rising from Isengard these days.  
     'Curse  him, root and branch!  Many  of those  trees  were  my  friends 
creatures I had known from nut and acorn; many had voices of their  own that 
are lost for ever now. And there are wastes of stump  and bramble where once 
there were singing groves. I have been idle. I have let things slip. It must 
stop!' 
     Treebeard raised  himself  from  his  bed  with a jerk,  stood  up, and 
thumped his hand on the table. The vessels of light trembled and sent up two  
jets  of  flame.  There  was a flicker like green fire in his  eyes, and his 
beard stood out stiff as a great besom. 
     'I will  stop it!' he boomed. 'And  you shall come  with me. You may be 
able  to help me. You will be helping your own friends that way, too; for if 
Saruman is not checked Rohan and Gondor will have an enemy behind as well 
as 
in front. Our roads go together -- to Isengard!' 
     'We will come with you,' said Merry. 'We will do wha t we can.' 
     'Yes!' said  Pippin. 'I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I 
should like  to be there, even if I could not  be of much use: I shall never  
forget Ugl®k and the crossing of Rohan.' 
     'Good! Good!'  said  Treebeard. 'But I spoke   hastily. We must  not  be 
hasty. I have become too hot. I must cool myself and think; fur it is easier 
to shout stop! than to do it.' 
     He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling rain 
of the spring. Then he laughed and shook himself, and wherever the  drops of 
water fell glittering from him to the ground they glinted like red and green 
sparks. He came back and laid himself on the bed again and was silent. 
     After some time the hobbits heard him murmuring  again. He seemed to be 
counting  on his fingers. 'Fangorn,  Finglas, Fladrif, aye, aye,' he sighed. 
'The trouble is  that there are so  few of us left,' he said turning towards 
the hobbits. 'Only  three remain of the first Ents that walked in the  woods 
before  the  Darkness: only myself, Fangorn, and  Finglas  and Fladrif  -- to 
give them their Elvish names; you may call them Leaflock and Skinbark if you  
like that better. And of us three Leaflock and Skinbark are not much use for  
this business. Leaflock has grown sleepy. almost  tree-ish, you might say: he 
has taken to standing by himself half-asleep all through the summer with the 
deep grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leafy hair he is. He 

####-used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been  too drowsy to walk   far 
even then.  Skinbark  lived on the mountain-slopes west of Isengard. That is 
where the worst  trouble  has been. He was wounded by the Orcs,  and many of 
his folk and his tree-herds have been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up 
into the high places, among the birches that he loves  best, and he will not 
come down. Still,  I  daresay I  could get  together a fair company  of  our 
younger folks-if  I could make  them understand the  need: if I could  rouse 
them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity the re are so few of us!' 
     'Why are there so few  when  you  have  lived in this country so long?' 
asked Pippin. 'Have a great many died?' 
     'Oh, no!' said Treebeard. 'None  have died from  inside, as  you  might 
say. Some have  fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of course: and 
more have  grown tree-ish. But  there were never many of us and we have  not 
increased. There have been no Entings  -- no children, you would say, not for  
a terrible long count of years. You see, we lost the Entwives.' 
     'How very sad!' said Pippin. 'How was it that they all died?' 
     'They did not die!' said Treebeard. 'I never said died. We lost them, I 
said. We lost them and we cannot find them.' He sighed. 'I thought most folk  
knew that. There were songs about the hunt of the Ents for the Entwives sung 
among  Elves  and  Men  from  Mirkwood  to  Gondor.  They  cannot  be  quite 
forgotten.' 
     'Well, I  am  afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to 
the Shire,'  said Merry. 'Won't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the 
songs?' 
     'Yes, I will indeed,' said Treebeard, seeming pleased with the request. 
'But  I  cannot  tell it properly, only in short; and then  we  must end our 
talk: tomorrow we have councils to call, and work to do, and maybe a journey 
to begin.' 
     'It is rather a strange and sad story,' he went on after a pause. 'When 
the  world  was young, and the woods were  wide  and wild,  the Ents and the 
Entwives  --  and  there  were  Entmaidens  then:  ah!   the  loveliness  of 
Fimbrethil, of Wandlimb the  lightfooted, in the days of our  youth! -- they 
walked  together  and they  housed together.  But our  hearts did not  go on 
growing in the same way: the Ents gave their love to things that they met in 
the world, and the Entwives gave their thought to other things, for the Ents 
loved the great trees; and the wild woods, and the slopes of the high hills; 
and they drank of the mountain-streams, and ate only such fruit as the trees 

####-let fall in their path;  and they learned of  the Elves and  spoke  with the 
Trees. But  the Entwives gave their  minds to the  lesser trees, and to  the 
meads in the sunshine  beyond the feet of the forests; and they saw the sloe 
in the thicket, and  the wild apple and the cherry blossoming in spring, and 
the green herbs in the waterlands in summer, and the seeding grasses in  the 
autumn  fields. They  did  not desire  to  speak with these things; but they 
wished  them to  hear and obey what was said to  them. The  Entwives ordered 
them to  grow  according to  their wishes, and bear leaf and fruit to  their 
liking; for the Entwives desired order, and plenty, and peace (by which they 
meant that things should remain  where they had set them).  So the  Entwives 
made gardens to live in. But  we Ents went on wandering, and we only came to 
the gardens  now and again. Then when the  Darkness came  in  the North, the 
Entwives crossed  the Great  River, and made new  gardens,  and  tilled  new 
fields, and  we saw  them more seldom. After the Darkness was overthrown the 
land of the Entwives blossomed richly,  and their  fields were full of corn. 
Many men learned the crafts of  the  Entwives and honoured them greatly; but 
we were only a legend to them, a secret in the heart of the forest. Yet here 
we still are,  while  all  the gardens of the Entwives are  wasted: Men call 
them the Brown Lands now. 
     'I remember it was  long ago --  in the time of  the war between Sauron 
and the Men of the Sea -- desire came over me to see Fimbrethil  again. Very 
fair she was still in my eyes, when I had last seen her, though  little like 
the  Entmaiden  of old.  For  the Entwives were bent  and  browned  by their  
labour; their hair  parched  by the sun to the hue  of ripe corn  and  their 
cheeks  like  red apples.  Yet their eyes were still  the eyes  of  our  own 
people.  We  crossed  over Anduin and came to  their  land:  but  we found a  
desert: it was all  burned and uprooted, for war had passed over it. But the 
Entwives were not there. Long  we called, and long we searched; and we asked 
all  folk  that  we  met which way the Entwives had gone. Some said they had 
never seen them;  and  some said that they had seen them walking  away west, 
and some said east, and others south. But nowhere that we went could we find 
them. Our sorrow was very great. Yet the wild  wood called, and we  returned 
to it. For many years we used to go out every now and again and look for the 
Entwives.  walking far and wide and  calling  them by their beautiful names.  
But as time passed we went  more  seldom and  wandered less far. And now the 
Entwives are only a memory for us, and our  beards  are  long and  grey. The 
Elves made many songs concerning the Search of  the  Ents,  and some of  the 

####-songs passed into the tongues of  Men. But we made  no songs about it, being 
content to chant  their beautiful names when we thought of the Entwives.  We 
believe that we may meet again in  a time to come, and perhaps we shall find 
somewhere  a  land where we can live together and both be content. But it is 
foreboded  that tha t will only be  when we have  both  lost all  that we now 
have.  And  it may  well be that that time is  drawing near at last. For  if 
Sauron of old destroyed the gardens, the Enemy today seems likely  to wither 
all the woods.  
     'There  was  an Elvish  song  that  spoke  of this, or at  least  so  I 
understand  it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It was never 
an Entish song, mark you: it would have been a very long song in Entish! But 
we  know it by heart, and  hum it now and again. This  is how it runs in your 
tongue: 
     ENT. 
     When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough; 
     When light is on the wild-wood stream, and wind is on the brow;  
     When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the mountain -air, 
     Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is fair! 
 
     entwife. 
     When Spring is come to garth and field, and corn is in the blade; 
     When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid; 
     When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air, 
     I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair. 
 
     ent. 
     When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold  
     Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold; 
     When woodland halls are green and cool, and wind is in the West, 
     Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best! 
 
     entwife. 
     When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown; 
     When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to town ; 
     When honey spills, and apple swells, though wind be in the West, 
     I'll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best! 
 

####-     ent. 
     When Winter comes, the winter wild that hill and wood shall slay; 
     When trees shall fall and starless night devour the sunless day; 
     When wind is in the deadly East, then in the bitter rain  
     I'll look for thee, and call to thee; I'll come to thee again! 
 
     entwife. 
     When Winter comes, and singing ends; when darkness falls at last; 
     When broken is the barren bough, and light and labour past; 
     I'll look for thee, and wait for thee, until we meet again: 
     Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain! 
 
     both. 
     Together we will take the road that leads into the West, 
     And far away will find a land where both our hearts may rest.' 
 
     Treebeard ended  his song.  'That  is  how it goes,'  he  said.  'It is 
Elvish, of course: lighthearted, quickworded, and soon over. I daresay it is 
fair  enough. But the Ents could say  more on their side,  if they had time! 
But now I am going to stand  up  and  take  a little sleep.  Where  will you  
stand?' 
     'We usually  lie down to  sleep,' said Merry.  'We  shall  be all right 
where we are.' 
     'Lie down to sleep!' said Treebeard. 'Why of course you do! Hm, hoom: I  
was  forgetting:  singing that song  put  me in mind  of  old times;  almost  
thought that I was talking to young Entings, I did. Well, you can lie on the 
bed. I am going to stand in the rain. Good night!' 
     Merry  and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft grass 
and fern. It was fresh,  and sweet-scented, and warm. The lights died  down, 
and the glow of the trees faded; but outside  under  the arch they could see 
old Treebeard standing, motionless, with his arms raised above his head. The 
bright stars peered out of the sky, and lit the falling water as  it spilled 
on to his fingers  and head,  and  dripped, dripped, in  hundreds  of silver 
drops on to  his  feet. Listening to the tinkling of  the drops  the hobbits 
fell asleep. 
     They  woke to find a cool sun  shining into the great court, and on  to 
the floor of the bay. Shreds of high cloud were overhead, running on a stiff 

####-easterly wind. Treebeard was not to be seen; but while Merry and Pippin were 
bathing in the basin by the arch, they heard him humming and  singing, as he 
came up the path between the trees.  
     'Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin!' he boomed, when he saw 
them. 
'You  sleep long. I have  been many a hundred  strides already today. Now we 
will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.' 
     He  poured  them  out two  full bowls  from a  stone  jar;  but  from a  
different jar. The taste was not the same  as it  had been the night before: 
it was earthier and  richer, more sustaining and  food-like,  so  to  speak. 
While the hobbits drank, sitting on the edge of  the bed, and nibbling small 
pieces of elf-cake (more because they felt that eating was a  necessary part 
of breakfast than  because they  felt  hungry), Treebeard stood,  humming in 
Entish or Elvish or some strange tongue, and looking up at the sky. 
     'Where is Entmoot?' Pippin ventured to ask. 
     'Hoo, eh? Entmoot?' said Treebeard, turning round. 'It is not a  place, 
it  is a  gathering of Ents  --  which does not often happen nowadays.  But I 
have  managed  to make a fair number  promise to come.  We shall meet in the 
place  where we have always met: Derndingle  Men  call it.  It is away south 
from here. We must be there before noon.' 
     Before long they set off. Treebeard carried the  hobbits in his arms as 
on the previous day. At  the entrance to  the court he turned  to the right, 
stepped over the stream, and strode away southwards along  the feet of great 
tumbled slopes where trees were scanty. Above these the hobbits saw thickets 
of birch and rowan, and beyond them dark climbing pinewoods.  Soon 
Treebeard 
turned a little away from the hills and plunged into deep groves,  where the 
trees were  larger, taller, and  thicker  than any that the hobbits had ever 
seen before. For a  while they felt faintly the sense of stifling which they 
had  noticed when  they  first ventured into Fangorn,  but it  soon  passed. 
Treebeard  did   not  talk  to  them.  He   hummed  to  himself  deeply  and 
thoughtfully,  but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words: it sounded  like 
boom, boom, rumboom, boorar, boom, boom, dahrar boom boom, dahrar 
boom,  and 
so on with  a constant change of note and rhythm. Now and again they thought 
they heard an answer, a hum or a quiver of sound, that seemed  to come out of 
the earth, or  from boughs above  their heads, or perhaps  from the boles of 

####-the trees; but Treebeard did not stop or turn his head to either side. 
     They had been going for a  long while  -- Pippin had tried to keep count 
of the 'ent-strides' but had failed, getting lost at about three thousand -- 
when  Treebeard  began to  slacken his pace. Suddenly he  stopped,  put  the 
hobbits down, and raised his curled  hands to his mouth so that they  made a  
hollow tube; then he blew or called through them. A great hoom, hom rang out 
like a deep-throated horn in the woods, and seemed  to echo  from the trees.  
Far off there came from  several directions  a similar  hoom, hom, hoom that 
was not an echo but an answer. 
     Treebeard  now perched Merry and Pippin on his shoulders  and strode on 
again, every now and then sending out another horn-call,  and each time  the 
answers came louder and nearer. In this way they came at last to what looked 
like an impenetrable  wall of dark evergreen trees, trees of a kind that the 
hobbits had never seen  before:  they branched out right from the roots, and 
were densely clad in dark glossy leaves like thornless holly, and  they bore 
many stiff upright flower -spikes with large shining olive-coloured buds.  
     Turning to the  left and skirting this huge hedge  Treebeard  came in a  
few strides to a  narrow entrance. Through it a  worn path passed  and dived 
suddenly down  a long steep slope. The hobbits saw that they were descending 
into a great  dingle, almost as round as a bowl, very wide and deep, crowned  
at the rim with the high dark evergreen hedge. It  was smooth and  grassclad 
inside,  and  there were no  trees  except  three  very tall  and  beautiful 
silver -birches that stood at the  bottom  of the bowl.  Two  other paths led 
down into the dingle: from the west and from the east. 
     Several Ents had already arrived.  More were coming  in down the  other  
paths, and  some were now following Treebeard. As they drew near the hobbits 
gazed  at them.  They had expected to see a number of creatures as much like 
Treebeard as  one hobbit is like another (at any  rate to a stranger's eye); 
and they were very much surprised to see nothing of the  kind. The Ents were 
as different from  one another as trees from trees: some as different as one 
tree  is  from  another of the  same  name  but  quite  different growth and 
history; and some as different  as one tree-kind from another, as birch from 
beech; oak from fir. There were a few older Ents,  bearded and gnarled  like 
hale  but  ancient trees (though none looked  as ancient as Treebeard);  and 
there   were  tall  strong  Ents,   clean-limbed  and  smooth-skinned   like 
forest -trees  in  their  prime; but  there were no young Ents, no  saplings. 
Altogether there were about two  dozen standing on the wide grassy  floor of 

####-the dingle, and as many more were marching in. 
     At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety  that they 
saw: the many shapes, and colours, the differences in girth; and height, and 
length of leg and arm; and in the number of toes  and fingers (anything from 
three to nine). A few seemed more or less related to Treebeard, and reminded 
them of beech-trees  or oaks. But  there were other kinds. Some recalled the 
chestnut: brown-skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands, and short thick 
legs. Some recalled  the  ash:  tall straight grey  Ents  with many-fingered 
hands and long legs; some  the fir (the tallest Ents), and others the birch, 
the  rowan, and the linden.  But when the Ents all gather ed round Treebeard, 
bowing their  heads  slightly, murmuring in  their  slow musical voices, and 
looking long  and intently at the strangers, then the hobbits saw  that they 
were all of the same kindred, and all had  the same eyes: not all so old  or  
so  deep  as Treebeard's,  but  all  with the  same slow, steady, thoughtful 
expression, and the same green flicker. 
     As soon as the  whole company was assembled,  standing in a wide circle  
round  Treebeard, a curious and unintelligible conversation began.  The Ents 
began to murmur slowly: first  one joined and then  another, until they were 
all chanting together in a long rising and falling rhythm, now louder on one 
side  of  the ring, now dying away there and rising to a great boom  on  the 
other  side. Though he could not catch or  understand any of the words  -- he 
supposed the language was Entish  -- Pippin found the  sound very pleasant to 
listen to at first;  but gradually his attention wavered.  After a long time 
(and the  chant showed no signs  of  sla ckening) he found himself wondering, 
since  Entish  was  such  an 'unhasty'  language,  whether they had yet  got 
further than Good Morning; and if  Treebeard  was to call the roll, how many 
days it would take to sing all their names. 'I wonder what the Entish is for  
yes or no,' he thought. He yawned. 
     Treebeard  was immediately  aware  of him. 'Hm, ha, hey, my Pippin!' he 
said,  and the other Ents all stopped their chant. 'You are a hasty folk,  I 
was forgetting; and anyway it is  wearisome listening to a speech you do not 
understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot, 
and 
they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Orcs, and  that  a  
new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that 
is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry  can stroll about in the dingle, 
if you like.  There is  a well of  good water, if you  need refreshing, away 

####-yonder in the north bank.  There are still  some  words  to speak before the 
Moot really begins.  I will come  and see you again, and tell you how things 
are going.' 
     He put the hobbits down. Before they walked away, they bowed  low. This 
feat  seemed  to amuse  the Ents very much, to judge by the  tone  of  their 
murmurs, and the flicker of their  eyes; but they soon turned  back to their 
own  business. Merry  and Pippin  climbed up the path that came in from  the 
west, and looked  through the opening in the  great  hedge.  Long  tree-clad 
slopes  rose  from  the  lip of  the dingle, and away beyond them, above the 
fir-trees of the furthest  ridge there rose, sharp and white, the peak of  a  
high  mountain.  Southwards to their left they could see the forest  falling 
away  down  into  the  grey distance. There far  away there was a pale green 
glimmer that Merry guessed to be a glimpse of the plains of Rohan. 
     'I wonder where Isengard is?' said Pippin. 
     'I  don't  know quite where  we are,'  said  Merry;  'but that peak  is 
probably Methedras. and as far  as I can remember the  ring of Isengard lies 
in a  fork or deep cleft  at the end of the  mountains. It  is probably down 
behind this  great ridge. There seems to be a smoke or haze over there, left 
of the peak, don't you think?' 
     'What  is Isengard like?' said Pippin. 'I wonder what Ents can do a bout 
it anyway.'  'So do I,' said Merry.  'Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or  
hills, I think, with a flat space inside and an island or pillar of rock  in 
the  middle, called Orthanc. Saruman has  a tower  on  it. There  is a gate, 
perhaps  more  than   one, in the encircling wall,  and I  believe there is a  
stream running  through it; it  comes  out  of  the  mountains, and flows on 
across the Gap  of  Rohan. It does not seem the  sort  of place for  Ents to 
tackle.  But I  have an odd feeling  about these Ents: somehow I don't think  
they are quite as safe and, well funny as  they seem. They seem slow, queer, 
and  patient, almost  sad; and yet I believe  they could  be roused.  If that 
happened, I would rather not be on the other side.' 
     'Yes!' said  Pippin.  'I  know  what you mean.  There might be  all the 
difference between an old cow sitting and  thoughtfully chewing, and a  bull  
charging; and the change might come  suddenly.  I wonder  if  Treebeard will 
rouse them. I am sure he means to  try.  Bu t they don't like  being  roused. 
Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then bottled it up again.' 
     The hobbits turned back.  The voices of the Ents were still  rising and 
falling in their  conclave. The sun had now risen high  enough to look  over 

####-the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of  the birches and lit the northward 
side of the  dingle  with  a  cool yellow  light.  There they  saw  a little 
glittering fountain. They walked along the rim of the great bowl at the feet 
of the evergreens-it was pleasant to feel cool grass about their toes again, 
and  not to  be in a hurry-and then they climbed down  to the gushing water.  
They drank a little,  a clean, cold, sharp  draught, and sat down on a mossy 
stone,  watching the  patches of  sun  on the grass and the shadows  of  the 
sailing clouds passing over the  floor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents 
went on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world, and 
far from everything  that had ever  happened  to  them. A great longing  came 
over them for the faces and voices of their companions. especially for Frodo 
and Sam, and for Strider. 
     At last there came  a pause in the  Ent-voices; and looking up they saw 
Treebeard coming towards them. with another Ent at his side. 
     'Hm, hoom, here I am again,' said Treebeard. 'Are you getting weary, or 
feeling  impatient,  hmm,  eh? Well, I  am  afraid  that  you  must  not get 
impatient yet. We have finished the first stage now; but I have still got to 
explain things again to those that live a  long  way off, far from Isengard, 
and those that I could not get round to before the Moot, and  after that  we 
shall have to decide  what to do. However, deciding what to do does not take 
Ents so  long as going over all the facts  and events that  they have to make 
up their  minds  about. Still, it is no use denying, we shall be here a long 
time yet: a couple of  days very likely. So I  have brought you a companion.  
He  has an ent-house nearby.  Bregalad  is his  Elvish name. He says  he has 
already made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm, hm, he 
is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought  to get on together. 
Good-bye!' Treebeard turned and left them. 
     Bregalad  stood for some  time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and they  
looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of 'hastiness'. He was 
tall, and seemed to be one of the  younger Ents;  he had smooth shining skin 
on  his arms and legs; his lips  were ruddy, and his hair was grey-green. He 
could bend and  sway like a slender tree in the wind. At last  he spoke, and 
his voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard's.  
     'Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go  for a walk!' he said. 'I  am Bregalad, 
that  is Quickbeam in your language. But it is on ly  a  nickname, of course. 
They have called me that ever since I said yes to an elder Ent before he had 
finished his question. Also I drink quickly, and go out while some are still 

####-wetting their beards. Come with me!' 
     He reached down two shapely arms and gave a long -fingered hand to  each 
of  the hobbits. All that day  they  walked  about in  the  woods with  him, 
singing, and laughing; for Quickbeam  often  laughed. He laughed if the  sun 
came out from  behind  a cloud, he laughed  if  they came upon a  stream  or  
spring: then  he stooped  and  splashed  his  feet  and head with water;  he 
laughed sometimes  at some sound or whisper in  the trees. Whenever he saw a  
rowan-tree he halted a  while  with  his  arms stretched out,  and sang, and 
swayed as he sang. 
     At  nightfall  he  brought  them to his ent-house:  nothing more than a  
mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank. Rowan-trees grew in a circle 
about it, and there was water  (as in all ent-houses), a spring bubbling out 
from the bank. They  talked for a while as darkness fell on  the forest. Not 
far away  the voices of  the Entmoot  could be heard still going on; but now 
they seemed deeper and less  leisurely,  and every  now  and again one great 
voice would rise in a high and  quickening music,  while all the others died 
away.  But beside them Bregalad  spoke gently  in their  own  tongue, almost 
whispering; and they learned that  he belonged to Skinbark's people, and the  
country where they had lived had been ravaged. That  seemed  to the  hobbits 
quite enough to explain his 'hastiness', at least in the matter of Orcs. 
     'There were rowan-trees in my home,'  said Bregalad,  softly and sadly, 
'rowan-trees that took root when I was an Enting, many many years ago in the 
quiet of the  world. The  oldest were planted by the Ents to try  and please 
the Entwives;  but  they looked at them and smiled and  said  that they knew 
where  whiter blossom and richer fruit were growing. Yet there are no  trees 
of all  that race, the people of the Rose, that are  so beautiful to me. And 
these trees grew and grew, till the  shadow of each  was like a  green hall, 
and  their red  berries in the  autumn  were  a burden,  and a beauty  and a  
wonder. Birds used to flock there. I like birds, even when they chatter; and 
the  rowan has enough  and  to  spare. But  the birds became  unfriendly and 
greedy  and tore at the trees, and threw  the fruit down and did not eat it. 
Then  Orcs came  with axes and cut down my trees. I came  and called them by 
their long names, but they did not quiver, they did not hear or answer: they 
lay dead. 
     O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! 
     O rowan fair, upon your hair how white the blossom lay! 
     O rowan mine, I saw you shine upon a summer's day, 

####-     Your rind so bright, your leaves so light, your voice so cool and soft: 
     Upon your head how golden-red the crown you bore aloft! 
     O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and grey; 
     Your crown is spilled, your voice is stilled for ever and a day. 
     O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! 
     The hobbits  fell asleep to the sound of  the soft singing of Bregalad, 
that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that he had loved. 
     The next day they spent also in his company,  but they  did not  go far 
from his 'house'. Most of the time they sat silent under the shelter  of the 
bank; for  the wind was colder, and  the clouds closer and greyer; there was 
little sunshine,  and in the  distance the voices  of  the Ents at the  Moot 
still  rose  and  fell, sometimes  loud  and strong, sometimes low  and sad, 
sometimes  quickening, sometimes slow and solemn as a dirge. A  second night 
came and  still  the  Ents  held conclave under hurrying  clouds  and fitful 
stars. 
     The third day broke, bleak and windy.   At sunrise the Ents' voices rose 
to a great clamour and then died down again. As the morning wore on the wind 
fell  and  the  air grew  heavy with expectancy. The hobbits could  see that 
Bregalad  was now listening intently, although to them,  down in the dell of 
his ent-house, the sound of the Moot was faint. 
     The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the mountains. sent 
out  long  yellow beams  between the  cracks  and  fissures of  the  clouds.  
Suddenly they were aware  that  everything wa s very quiet; the  whole forest  
stood in listening silence. Of course, the Ent -voices had stopped.  What did 
that mean? Bregalad was standing up erect and tense, looking back northwards 
towards Derndingle. 
     Then with  a crash came  a great ringing shou t:  ra-hoom-rah! The trees 
quivered and bent as if a gust had struck them. There was another pause, and 
then a  marching  music began like solemn drums, and above the rolling beats 
and booms there welled voices singing high and strong. 
     We come, we come with roll of drum: ta -runda runda runda rom! 
     The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song: 
     We come, we come with horn and drum: ta -ryna ryna ryna rom! 
     Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house. 
     Before  long  they  saw the  marching  line approaching: the Ents  were 
swinging along with great strides down the slope towards them. Treebeard was 
at  their head,  and  some  fifty followers  were  behind him,  two abreast, 

####-keeping step with their feet  and beating time  with  their hands upon their 
flanks. As they drew near the flash and flicker of their eyes could be seen. 
     'Hoom, hom! Here we  come with a  boom, here  we come at last!'  called  
Treebeard when he caught sight of Bregalad  and the hobbits. 'Come, join the 
Moot! We are off. We are off to Isengard!' 
     'To Isengard!' the Ents cried in many voices.  
     'To Isengard!' 
     To Isengard! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of stone; 
     Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, 
     We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door; 
     For bole and bough are burning now, the furnace roars -- we go to war! 
     To land of gloom with tramp  of doom, with  roll  of drum, we come,  we  
come; 
     To Isengard with doom we come! 
     With doom we come, with doom we come! 
     So they sang as they marched southwards. 
     Bregalad, his eyes shining, swung into  the  line beside Treebeard. The 
old Ent  now took the hobbits back, and set them on his shoulders again, and 
so they rode proudly at the head of  the sin ng  company with beating hearts 
and heads held high. Though they ad expected something to happen eventually, 
they were amazed at the change that had come over the Ents. It seemed now as 
sudden  as the bursting of a flood that had long been held back by a dike. 
     'The Ents made up  their minds rather quickly, after all, didn't they?' 
Pippin  ventured to  say  after  some time, when  for a  moment  the singing 
paused, and only the beating of hands and feet was heard. 
     'Quickly?' said Treebeard. 'Hoom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I expected. 
Indeed I have not seen them roused like this for many an age. We Ents do not 
like being roused; and we never are roused unless it is clear to us that our 
trees  and our  lives  are in  great  danger. That has not happened  in this 
Forest since the wars of Sauron and the Men of the Sea.  It is the orc-work, 
the wanton hewing  -- rbrum --  without even the  bad excuse of  feeding the 
fires, that has so angered us; and the  treachery of a neighbour, who should 
have helped us. Wizards ought to know better: they do know  better. There is 
no curse in  Elvish, Entish, or  the  tongues  of Men bad  enough  for  such 
treachery. Down with Saruman!' 
     'Will you really break the doors of Isengard?' asked Merry. 
     'Ho, hm, well, we could, you know! You do not know, perhaps. how strong 

####-we are. Maybe you have heard  of Trolls? They  are mighty strong. But Trolls 
are only counterfeits. made by the  Enemy in the Great  Darkness, in mockery 
of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves. We are stronger than Trolls.  We are made of 
the  bones  of  the earth. We can split stone like  the roots of trees, only 
quicker, far quicker, if our minds are roused!  If we  are not hewn down, or  
destroyed  by  fire  or blast  of  sorcery,  we could  split  Isengard  into 
splinters and crack its walls into rubble.' 
     'But Saruman will try to stop you. won't he?' 
     'Hm,  ah, yes, that is so. I  have  not  forgotten  it.  Indeed  I have 
thought long about it. But. you see, many of the Ents are younger than I am.  
by many lives of trees. They  are all  roused now. and  their mind is all on  
one  thing: breaking Isengard.  But they will  start  thinking  again before 
long; they  will  cool down a little.  when we take our evening drink. What a  
thirst we shall have! But let them march now and sing! We have a long way to 
go, and there is time ahead for thought. It is something to have started.' 
     Treebeard marched on, singing with the others for a  while.  But after a  
time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pippin could see that 
his old  brow was wrinkled and  knotted.  At  last he  looked up, and Pippin 
could see a sad look in his eyes,  sad but not unhappy. There was a light in 
them, as if   the green  flame had  sunk deeper into the  dark  wells of  his 
thought. 
     'Of course, it  is likely  enough, my friends,' he said slowly, 'likely 
enough that we are going to  our doom: the last march of the Ents. But if we 
stayed at home  and did noth ing, doom would find us anyway, sooner or later. 
That thought has long been  growing in our hearts;  and that is  why we  are 
marching now. It was not a hasty resolve. Now at least the last march of the 
Ents may  be worth a song.  Aye,'  he sighed, 'we may help the other peoples 
before we pass away. Still, I should have liked to see the  songs come  true 
about the Entwives. I should dearly have liked to  see Fimbrethil again. But 
there, my friends, songs  like trees bear fruit  only  in their own time and 
their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.' 
     The Ents  went  striding  on at a great pace. They had descended into a  
long fold of the land that fell away southward;  now they began to climb up,  
and up, on to the high western  ridge. The woods fell  away and they came to 
scattered groups of birch, and  then  to bare slopes where only  a few gaunt 
pine-trees grew. The sun  sank behind the dark hill -back in front. Grey dusk  
fell. 

####-     Pippin looked behind. The number of  the Ents had grown -- or  what was 
happening? Where  the dim bare  slopes that  they had crossed should lie, he 
thought he saw groves of trees. But they were  moving! Could it be  that the 
trees of  Fangorn  were awake, and the  forest was rising, marching over the 
hills to war? He rubbed his  eyes wondering if sleep and shadow had deceived 
him; but the great grey shapes moved steadily onward. There was a noise like 
wind  in many branches. The Ents were  drawing  near the  crest of the ridge 
now, and all song had ceased. Night fell, and there was silence: nothing was 
to be  heard save a faint quiver of the earth beneath the  feet of the Ents,  
and a rustle, the shade of a whisper as of  many  drifting  leaves. At  last  
they stood upon the summit, and looked down into a dark pit: the great cleft  
at the end of the mountains: Nan Curunnr, the Valley of Saruman. 
     'Night lies over Isengard,' said Treebeard. 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. The White Rider 

 
 
     'My very bones are chilled,' said Gimli, flapping his arms and stamping 
his  feet.  Day  had  come at last.  At dawn  the companions  had made  such 
breakfast as they could; now in the growing light they were getting ready to  
search the ground again for signs of the hobbits. 
     'And do not forget that old man!' said Gimli. 'I should be happier if I 
could see the print of a boot.' 
     'Why would that make you happy?' said Legolas.  
     'Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more than he 
seemed,' answered the Dwarf.  
     'Maybe,' said the Elf; 'but a heavy boot might leave no print here: the 
grass is deep and springy.' 
     'That would not  baffle a Ranger,' said Gimli.  'A bent blade is enough 
for Aragorn to read.  But I do not expect  him to find any traces. It was an 
evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night.  I am sure of it, even under  
the light of morning. His eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even  now,  
maybe.' 
     'It is likely enough,' said  Aragorn; 'yet I am not sure. I am thinking 
of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scared away. Bu t I 
did not think so. Did  you hear  them, Legolas? Did they  sound to you  like 
beasts in terror?' 
     'No,' said Legolas. 'I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our 
own  fear I should have guessed that they  were beasts wild with some sudden 
gladness.  They spoke as horses will when they meet a friend  that they have 
long missed.' 
     'So I thought,'  said  Aragorn; 'but I  cannot  read the riddle, unless 
they return. Come! The  light  is growing fast. Let  us look first and guess 
later! We should  begin here,  near  to  our own  camping-ground,  searching  
carefully all about, and working  up  the slope  towards the forest. To find 
the  hobbits is  our  errand, whatever we may think of  our  visitor in  the 
night. If  they  escaped by some chance,  then they  must have hidden in the 
trees, or they would have been seen. If we find nothing between here and the 
eaves of the wood, then we will make a last search upon the battle-field and  
among the ashes. But there  is little hope there:  the horsemen  of Rohan did 

####-their work too well.' 
     For some  time the companions crawled and groped upon  the  ground. The 
tree stood  mournfully above  them, its  dry  leaves now hanging  limp,  and  
rattling in the chill  easterly wind. Aragorn moved  slowly away. He came to  
the ashes of the watch-fire  near the river -bank, and then  began to retrace 
the ground back towards the knoll where the battle had been fought. Suddenly 
he stooped and bent low with his face almost in the grass. Then he called to 
the others. They came running up. 
     'Here at  last we find  news!' said Aragorn. He lifted up a broken leaf 
for them  to see,  a large  pale leaf of golden  hue, now fading and turning 
brown. 'Here is a mallorn-leaf  of Lurien, and there are small crumbs on it, 
and a  few more crumbs in the grass.  And  see! there are  some pieces of cut 
cord lying nearby!' 
     'And here is  the knife that cut them!' said Gimli. He stooped and drew 
out of a tussock, into which some heavy foot had trampled it, a short jagged  
blade. The  haft from  which it  had  been snapped was beside it. 'It was an 
orc-weapon,'  he said,  holding it gingerly, and looking with disgust at the 
carved handle: it  had been shaped like  a hideous  head with squinting eyes 
and leering mouth. 
     'Well, here is  the strangest riddle that we have yet found!' exclaimed 
Legolas.  'A  bound  prisoner  escapes  both from  the  Orcs  and  from  the 
surrounding horsemen.  He  then stops, while still in the open, and cuts his 
bonds with an orc-knife. But how and why?  For if his legs were tied, how did 
he walk? And if his arms were tied, how did he use the knife? And if neither  
were tied, why did he cut the cords at all? Being pleased with his skill, he 
then sat down and quietly ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show 
that he was a hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that,  I  suppose,  he 
turned his arms into  wings and flew away singing into the trees. It  should 
be easy to find him: we only need wings ourselves!' 
     'There was sorcery here right enough,' said  Gimli. 'What was that  old 
man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of Legolas. Can you  
better it?' 
     'Maybe,  I could,' said Aragorn, smiling.  'There are  some other signs 
near at hand  that  you have not considered. I agree that the prisoner was a  
hobbit and must have had either legs  or hands free, before he came  here. I 
guess that it was  hands, because the riddle then becomes easier,  and  also 
because, as I read the marks, he was carried to this point by  an Orc. Blood 

####-was spilled  there,  a few paces away, orc-blood. There  are  deep prints of 
hoofs  all about this  spot, and signs that a heavy thing was  dragged away. 
The Orc  was slain by horsemen, and later  his body  was hauled to the fire. 
But the hobbit  was not seen: he was not "in the open", for it was night and 
he still had his elven-cloak. He was exhausted and  hungry, and it is not to 
be wondered at  that, when he had cut his bonds with the knife of his fallen 
enemy, he rested and ate a little  before he crept away. But it is a comfort 
to  know  that he had some lembas in  his  pocket, even though  he  ran away 
without gear  or pack;  that, perhaps, is  like a hobbit. I say he, though I 
hope and guess  that both  Merry and  Pippin were  here together. There  is, 
however, nothing to show that for certain.' 
     'And how do you suppose that either of  our friends came to have a hand 
free?' asked Gimli. 
     'I do  not know how it happened,' answered Aragorn. 'Nor  do I know why 
an Orc was carrying them  away. Not  to help  them to escape, we may be sure. 
Nay, rather I think that I now begin to understand a matter that has puzzled 
me  from  the beginning: why when  Boromir had fallen  were the Orcs content 
with the capture  of Merry and Pippin? They did not seek out  the rest of us,  
nor attack our camp;  but instead they went with all speed towards Isengard.  
Did they suppose they had captured the Ring-bearer and his faithful comrade?  
I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such plain orders to Orcs,  
even if they knew so much themselves; they would not speak openly to them of 
the  Ring: they  are not trusty servants. But  I  think  the  Orcs had  been 
commanded  to capture hobbits, alive, at all costs.  An attempt was made  to 
slip out with the precious prisoners  before the  battle. Treachery perhaps, 
likely  enough with such folk; some large and bold Orc may have  been trying 
to  escape with the  prize  alone, for his own ends. There, that is my tale. 
Others might  be devised. But on this we may count in any case: one at least  
of our  friends escaped. It is our task to find him and help  him  before we 
return to Rohan.  We  must not  be  daunted by Fangorn, since need drove him 
into that dark place.' 
     'I  do  not  know  which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the 
long road through Rohan on foot,' said Gimli. 
     'Then let us go to the forest,' said Aragorn. 
     It was  not  long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point,  near 
the bank  of the Entwash, he came upon  footprints:  hobbit-prints, but  too 
light for  much to  be made of  them. Then again beneath the bole of a great 

####-tree on the very edge of the wood more prints were discovered. The earth was 
bare and dry, and did not reveal much. 
     'One hobbit at least stood  here for a while and looked  back; and then 
he turned away into the forest,' said Aragorn. 
     'Then we must go  in, too,' said Gimli. 'But I do not like the look  of 
this Fangorn: and  we  were  warned  against  it. I  wish the chase had  led 
anywhere else!' 
     'I do  not think  the wood feels evil,  whatever  tales  may say,' said 
Legolas. He stood under the  eaves of the forest, stooping forward, as if he 
were listening, and peering with wide eyes into the shadows. 'No, it is  not 
evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the faintest echoes of 
dark places where the hearts of the trees are black. There is no malice near 
us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.' 
     'Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,'  said Gimli.  'I have done 
it no harm. ' 
     'That is just as well,' said Legolas. 'But nonetheless it has  suffered 
harm. There  is something  happening inside, or  going to happen. Do you not 
feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.' 
     'I feel  the air is stuffy,' said the Dwarf. 'This wood is lighter than 
Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.' 
     'It is old, very old,' said the Elf. 'So old that almost  I  feel young 
again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. It is old and 
full of memory. I  could have been happy  here,  if  I  had come in days  of 
peace.' 
     'I dare say  you could,'  snorted Gimli. 'You are a  Wood-elf,  anyway, 
though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Where you go, 
I will go. But keep your bow ready to  hand, and I will keep my axe loose in 
my belt. Not  for  use on trees,' he  added hastily, looking  up at the tree 
under which they  stood.  'I do not  wish to meet that  old  man at unawares 
without an argument ready to hand, that is all. Let us go!' 
     With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn. Legolas 
and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little for him to see. The 
floor of the forest was dry and covered with a drift of leaves; but guessing 
that the fugitives would stay near the water, he returned oft en to the banks 
of the stream.  So it was that he came upon the place where Merry and Pippin 
had  drunk  and  bathed  their  feet.  There plain for all  to see were  the 
footprints of two hobbits, one somewhat smaller than the other. 

####-     'This is good tidings,' said Aragorn. 'Yet  the marks are  two days old 
And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the water -side.' 
     'Then what shall we do now?' said Gimli. 'We cannot pursue them through 
the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do  not find  
them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and 
show our friendship by starving together.' 
     'If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,'  said Aragorn. 
'Let us go on.' 
     They  came at  length  to the steep abrupt  end of Treebeard's Hill and 
looked  up at the rock -wall with its rough  steps leading to the high shelf.  
Gleams of sun were  striking through the hurrying clouds, and the forest now 
looked less grey and drear. 
     'Let  us go up a nd look about us!' said Legolas. 'I will feel my breath 
short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.' 
     The  companions climbed  up. Aragorn came last,  moving slowly: he  was 
scanning the steps and ledges closely. 
     'I am almost sure that the  hobbits  have been up here,'  he said. 'But 
there  are  other marks,  very strange marks,  which  I do not understand. I 
wonder if  we can see anything from this ledge which  will help us to  guess 
which way they went next?' 
     He  stood up and looked about,  but he saw nothing that was of any use. 
The shelf  faced southward  and  eastward; but only on the east was the view 
open. There he could see the heads  of the trees descending in ranks towards 
the plain from which they had come. 
     'We have journeyed a long way round,' said Legolas.  'We could have all 
come here safe together, if  we had left  the  Great River  on the second or  
third day and  struck  west.  Few  can foresee whither their road  will lead 
them, till they come to its end.' 
     'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,' said Gimli. 
     'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,' said Legolas. 'Look!' 
     'Look at what?' said Gimli. 
     'There in the trees.' 
     'Where? I have not elf-eyes.' 
     'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!'  said Legolas  pointing. 'Down in  the 
wood, back in the Way  that we have just come. It is he. Cannot you see him, 
passing from tree to tree?' 
     'I  see, I see  now!' hissed Gimli. 'Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you? 

####-There is the old man.  All in dirty  grey  rags: that is why I could not see 
him at first.' 
     Aragorn  looked and beheld a  bent figure moving slowly. It was not far 
away. It looked like  an old beggar-man, walking wearily, leaning on a rough 
staff. His head was bowed,  and he did not look towards them. In other lands 
they would have greeted him with kind words; but now they stood silent, each 
feeling a strange expectancy: something was  approaching that  held a hidden 
power -or menace. 
     Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the figure drew 
nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he burst out: 'Your  
bow,  Legolas! Bend  it!  Get ready! It is Saruman. Do not let him speak, or 
put a spell upon us! Shoot first!' 
     Legolas  took  his  bow and bent  it, slowly  and  as if some other will 
resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not fit it to the 
string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent. 
     'Why are  you waiting? What is the  matter with  you?' said Gimli in  a  
hissing whisper. 
     'Legolas is right,' said Aragorn quietly. 'We may not  shoot an old man 
so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be on us. Watch and 
wait!' 
     At that moment the old man quickened  his pace and came with surprising 
speed to the  foot of the  rock -wall. Then suddenly he looked up, while they  
stood motionless looking down. There was no sound. 
     They  could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he wore 
a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his  features were over -shadowed, except for  
the end  of his  nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed  to  Aragorn that he 
caught the gleam  of  eyes keen and bright  from  within  the shadow  of the 
hooded brows.  
     At last the old man  broke the silence.  'Well met indeed , my friends,' 
he said  in  a soft  voice. 'I wish to  speak to you. Will  you come down or  
shall I come up?' Without waiting for an answer he began to climb. 
     'Now!' said Gimli. 'Stop him, Legolas!' 
     'Did I not say that I wished to speak to you?'  said the old man.  'Put 
away that bow, Master Elf!' 
     The bow  and arrow fell from Legolas' hands, and his arms hung loose at 
his sides. 
     'And you, Master Dwarf, pray  take your hand from your axe-haft, till I 

####-am up! You will not need such arguments. ' 
     Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old man 
sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a  goat. All weariness seemed to have 
left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was a  gleam, too brief for 
certainty, a quick glint  of  white, as if some garment shrouded by the grey 
rags had been for an instant revealed The intake  of Gimli's breath could be 
heard as a loud hiss in the silence. 
     'Well met, I say again!' said the old man, coming towards them. When he 
was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with his head thrust  
forward, peering at them from under  his hood. 'And what may you be doing in 
these  parts? An Elf, a Man, and  a Dwarf. all  clad  in  elvish fashion. No 
doubt there is a tale worth hearing behind it all. Such things are not often 
seen here.' 
     'You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,' said Aragorn. 'Is that so?' 
     'Not well,' said  the  old man: 'that would be the study of many lives.  
But I come here now and again.' 
     'Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have to say 
to us?'  said Aragorn. 'The morning passes, and we have an errand  that will 
not wait.' 
     'As  for what I wished to say, I  have said it: What  may you be doing, 
and  what  tale can  you tell of yourselves? As for my name!'  He broke off,  
laughing  long  and  softly. Aragorn  felt a shudder run  through him at the 
sound, a  strange  cold  thrill; and yet  it was not  fear or terror that he 
felt: rather it was  like  the  sudden bite of a keen air,  or the slap of a  
cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper. 
     'My name!' said the  old  man again. 'Have you not guessed it  already?  
You have heard  it before, I  think. Yes, you have heard it before. But come 
now, what of your tale?' 
     The three companions stood silent and made no answer. 
     'There are some who would begin to doubt whether your  errand is fit to 
tell,' said the  old man. 'Happily I know something of it.  You are tracking 
the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hobbits. Don't stare, as 
if you had  never heard the strange  name before. You have,  and so have  I. 
Well, they climbed up  here  the day before yesterday; and  they met someone 
that they did not expect. Does that comfort you? And  now  you would like to 
know where they were taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news 
about 

####-that.  But why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent  
as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.' 
     The old man turned away  and went  towards a heap of fallen stones  and 
rock at the  foot of the cliff  behind. Immediately, as  if a spell had been 
removed, the others relaxed and  stirred. Gimli's  hand  went at once to his 
axe-haft. Aragorn drew his sword. Legolas picked up his bow. 
     The old man took no notice,  but stooped and sat himself on  a low flat 
stone. Then  his grey cloak  drew apart, and they saw, beyond doubt, that he 
was clothed beneath all in white. 
     'Saruman!' cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand. 'speak! 
Tell  us where you have  hidden  our friends! What  have you done with them?  
Speak, or  I will  make a dint in your hat that even  a wizard will find  it 
hard to deal with!' 
     The old  man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and leaped to 
the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly tall, towering above 
them. His hood and his grey rags were flung away. His  white garments shone. 
He  lifted up  his staff, and  Gimli's axe leaped from his  grasp  and  fell 
ringing on the ground. The sword of Aragorn,  stiff in his motionless  hand, 
blazed with a sudden fire. Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high  
into the air: it vanished in a flash of flame. 
     'Mithrandir!' he cried. 'Mithrandir!' 
     'Well met, I say to you again. Legolas!' said the old man. 
     They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in  the sunshine; and 
gleaming  white  was his robe;  the eyes under  his deep  brows were bright,  
piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between wonder, joy,  
and fear they stood and found no words to say. 
     At  last  Aragorn stirred.  'Gandalf!'  he said.  'Beyond all hope  you  
return to us in our  need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf!' Gimli said  
nothing, hut sank to his knees, shading his eyes.  
     'Gandalf,' the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory a long 
disused word. 'Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.' 
     He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak wrapped it  
about him: it seemed as if  the  sun had been  shining, but now was  hid  in 
cloud again.  'Yes, you may  still call me Gandalf,'  he said, and the voice 
was the  voice  of their old friend  and guide. 'Get  up, my  good Gimli! No 
blame to  you, and no harm done to  me. Indeed my friends,  none of you have 
any weapon that could  hurt me. Be merry! We meet  again. At the turn of the 

####-tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.' 
     He laid  his hand on  Gimli's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed 
suddenly. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'But you are all in white!' 
     'Yes, I am white  now,' said Gandalf.  'Indeed I am  Saruman, one might 
almost  say,  Saruman  as  he  should have  been. But come  now, tell me  of 
yourselves! I  have passed through fire and  deep water,  since we parted. I 
have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had 
forgotten. I can see  many things far off, but many things that are close at 
hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!' 
     'What do  you wish to know?' said Aragorn. 'All that has happened since 
we parted on  the bridge would be a long tale.  Will you  not first give  us 
news of the hobbits? Did you find them, and are they safe?' 
     'No, I did not find them,' said Gandalf. 'There was a darkness over the 
valleys of the  Emyn Muil, and I did not know  of their captivity, until the 
eagle told me.' 
     'The eagle!' said  Legolas. 'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the 
last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.' 
     'Yes,'  said Gandalf,  'that  was Gwaihir the Windlord,  who rescued me 
from Orthanc.  I sent him before me to watch the River and  gather  tidings. 
His sight is keen, but he cannot see all  that passes under hill  and  tree. 
Some things he has  seen, and  others I  have seen myself.  The Ring now has 
passed beyond my help, or  the help of any of  the Company that set out from 
Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to  the Enemy, but it escaped.  I had 
some part in that: for I sat  in a  high place, and I strove  with the  Dark 
Tower; and  the Shadow passed. Then  I  was weary, very weary; and I  walked 
long in dark thought.' 
     'Then you know about Frodo!' said Gimli. 'How do things go with him?' 
     'I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before him 
still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is all that I 
can say.' 
     'Not alone,' said Legolas. 'We think that Sam went with him.' 
     'Did he!' said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a smile on 
his face. 'Did  he indeed? It is news to  me, yet  it does not  surprise me. 
Good! Very good! You lighten  my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by 
me 
and tell me the tale of your journey.' 
     The companions  sat on the ground at his  feet, and Aragorn took up the 

####-tale. For a long  while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no quest ions. His 
hands were  spread upon his knees, and his eyes  were closed. At  last  when 
Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of his last journey upon the Great 
River, the old man sighed. 
     'You have not said  all  that you know or guess, Aragorn my  friend,' he 
said quietly. 'Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to him. It was  a  
sore trial  for such a man: a warrior, and a  lord of men. Galadriel told me 
that he was in peril. But  he escaped in the end.  I am glad. It was  not in 
vain that  the  young hobbits  came with us, if only for Boromir's sake. But 
that is not the  only part they have to play. They were brought  to Fangorn, 
and  their coming  was like  the  falling  of  small stones  that starts  an 
avalanche  in  the  mountains. Even  a s  we talk  here,  I  hear  the  first 
rumblings. Saruman  had  best  not be caught  away  from  home  when the dam 
bursts!' 
     'In one thing you  have not changed, dear friend,' said  Aragorn:  'you  
still speak in riddles.' 
     'What?  In riddles?'  sa id  Gandalf. 'No!  For I was talking  aloud  to 
myself. A habit of the old: they choose  the wisest  person present to speak 
to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.' He laughed, but 
the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam of sunshine. 
     'I am  no longer  young even  in the  reckoning of  Men of the  Ancient 
Houses,' said Aragorn. 'Will you not open your mind more clearly to me?' 
     'What  then shall  I say?'  said Gandalf, and  paused  for a  while  in 
thought. 'This in brief is how  I  see things at the moment, if you wish  to 
have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of course, has long 
known that the Ring  is abroad, and that it is  borne by a  hobbit. He knows 
now the number  of our  Company that set out fr om Rivendell, and the kind of 
each of us.  But he does  not yet  perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes 
that we were all going  to Minas Tirith; for that is what he  would  himself 
have done in our  place. And according to  his wisdom  it would have  been a 
heavy stroke against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what 
mighty  one  may suddenly  appear, wielding the Ring, and assailing him with 
war, seeking to cast him  down and take his  place. That we  should wish  to 
cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought that  occurs  to 
his  mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself has not yet entered 
into his darkest dream. In which no doubt you will see our good fortune  and  
our hope. For imagining war he has let loose war,  believing  that he has no 

####-time to  waste; for he  that  strikes the  first blow, if he strikes it hard 
enough, may need  to strike no  more.  So the forces that he has  long  been 
preparing he is now  setting in motion, sooner than he intended.  Wise  fool. 
For if he had used all his power to guard Mordor,  so that none could enter, 
and bent  all his guild  to the hunting of the  Ring, then indeed hope would 
have faded: neither  Ring nor Bearer could long have eluded him. But now his 
eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he looks towards Minas 
Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon it like a storm. 
     'For  already he knows that the messengers that  he  sent to waylay the 
Company have  failed again. They have not  found the Ring. Neither have they 
brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they done even so much as that, it 
would have been a heavy blow to us, and it might have been fatal. But let us 
not darken  our hearts by imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the 
Dark Tower. For the Enemy has failed-so far. Thanks to Saruman:' 
     'Then is not Saruman a traitor?' said Gimli. 
     'Indeed yes,' said Gandalf.  'Doubly. And is  not that strange? Nothing 
that  we have endured of  late has seemed  so grievous  as  the  treason  of 
Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown very strong. 
He threatens the Men of  Rohan and draws  off their help from Minas  Tirith, 
even as the main blow is approaching from the East. Yet a treacherous weapon 
is ever a danger to the hand.  Saruman also had a mind to capture  the Ring, 
for  himself,  or  at least to snare  some hobbits for his evil purposes. So 
between them our enemies have contrived only to  bring Merry and Pippin with 
marvellous speed, and in the  nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they  
would never have come at all! 
     'Also they have  filled  themselves with new doubts that  disturb their 
plans. No tidings of  the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to the horsemen  
of Rohan;  but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits were  taken in the  Emyn 
Muil  and borne away  towards Isengard against the will of his own servants. 
He now has Isengard to fear as  well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls,  
it will go ill with Saruman.' 
     'It is a pity that our  friends lie in between,' said Gimli. 'If no land 
divided Isengard  and Mordor, then  they could  fight  while we watched  and 
waited.' 
     'The victor would emerge  stronger  than either, and  free from doubt,' 
said  Gandalf.  'But  Isengard  cannot  figh t  Mordor,  unless Saruman first  
obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does not yet know his peril. 

####-There is much that he does not know. He was so eager to lay his hands on his 
prey that he could not wait at home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on  
his messengers. But he came too late, for once,  and the battle was over and 
beyond his help before he reached these parts. He did not  remain here long.  
I  look into  his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He believes 
that the horsemen slew and burned all  upon the field of battle; but he does 
not know whether  the Orcs were bringing any  prisoners or not. And  he does 
not know of  the  quarrel between his  servants and the Orcs  of Mordor; nor  
does he know of the Winged Messenger.' 
     'The Winged  Messenger!' cried  Legolas. 'I shot at him with the bow of 
Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled  him from the sky. He filled us all 
with fear. What new terror is this?' 
     'One that you cannot slay with arrows,'  said  Gandalf. 'You on ly  slew 
his steed.  It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed again.  For he 
was a Nazgyl, one of  the Nine, who ride now upon winged  steeds. Soon their 
terror will overshadow the last armies of  our friends, cutting off the sun. 
But they have not yet been allowed to cross the River, and  Saruman does not 
know of this new shape  in which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought 
is ever on  the Ring.  Was  it  present in the battle? Was it found? What if 
Thjoden, Lord of the Mark, should come by  it and learn of its power? That is 
the danger that he  sees,  and  he  has fled  back to Isengard to double and 
treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another danger, close 
at  hand,  which  he does  not  see, busy  with his fiery  thoughts. He  has 
forgotten Treebeard.' 
     'Now  you  speak  to  yourself  again,'  said  Aragorn  with  a  smile. 
'Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of  Saruman's  double 
treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two hobbits to Fangorn 
has served, save to give us a long and fruitless chase.' 
     'Wait a minute!'  cried Gimli. 'There  is another  thing that  I should 
like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last night?' 
     'You  certainly did  not see me, '  answered Gandalf,  'therefore I must  
guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that your desire 
to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused.' 
     'Good, good!' said Gimli. 'I am glad that it was not you.' 
     Gandalf laughed again. 'Yes, my good Dwarf,' he said, 'it is a  comfort 
not to  be mistaken at all  points. Do I not know  it only too well! But, of 
course, I  never blamed you for your welcome of me. How  could I  do so, who 

####-have so  often  counselled  my friends to suspect even their  own hands when 
dealing  with  the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Gluin! Maybe you will see 
us both together one day and judge between us!' 
     'But  the hobbits!' Legolas broke in. 'We have  come far to seek  them, 
and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?' 
     'With Treebeard and the Ents,' said Gandalf.  
     'The Ents!' exclaimed  Aragorn. 'Then there is truth in the old legends 
about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds of the trees?  
Are  there  still  Ents in the  world? I thought they were  only a memory of 
ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than a legend of Rohan.' 
     'A legend  of Rohan!' cried  Legolas. 'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has 
sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us  they 
are only a memory. If I were to meet one  still walking in this  world, then 
indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of 
Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem  to  speak of a  person. Who is 
this Treebeard?' 
     'Ah! now you are asking much,' said Gandalf. 'The little that I know of 
his long  slow  story would  make  a  tale for which we  have no  time  now.  
Treebeard  is Fangorn, the  guardian of the  forest; he is the oldest of the 
Ents, the oldest living thing that still  walks  beneath the Sun  upon  this 
Middle-earth. I  hope indeed,  Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and 
Pippin have been fortunate: they  met  him here, even where  we sit. For  he  
came here  two days ago  and bore  them away to his  dwelling far off by the  
roots of the  mountains. He often  comes here, especially  when  his mind is 
uneasy, and rumours of  the world outside trouble him. I  saw him  four days 
ago striding among the trees, and  I  think he saw me, for he  paused; but I 
did not  speak,  for I was heavy with  thought, and  weary after my struggle 
with the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.' 
     'Perhaps  he also thought that you were  Saruman,' said Gimli. 'But you  
speak of  him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was dangerous.' 
     'Dangerous!'  cried  Gandalf.  'And  so  am  I,  very  dangerous:  more 
dangerous than anything you  will  ever meet,  unless you are  brought alive 
before  the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas  is 
dangerous. You  are  beset with  dangers,  Gimli  son  of Gluin; for you are 
dangerous yourself,  in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is 
perilous-not  least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn 
himself, he  is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now 

####-his long slow wrath is brimming over, and all the forest is filled  with it. 
The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: 
it will soon be running like a flood; but its tide is turned against Saruman 
and the axes of Isengard.  A thing is about to happen which has not happened 
since the Elder  Days: the Ents are going to wake up and find that they  are 
strong.' 
     'What will they do?' asked Legolas in astonishment. 
     'I do not know,' said Gandalf. 'I do not think  they know themselves. I 
wonder.' He fell silent, his head bowed in thought. 
     The  others looked  at him. A gleam of sun through fleeting clouds fell 
on his hands, which lay now  upturned on his  lap: they seemed to  be filled 
with light as  a  cup is with water. At last he looked up and gazed straight 
at the sun. 
     'The morning is wearing away,' he said. 'Soon we must go.' 
     'Do we go to find our friends and to see Treebeard?' asked Aragorn. 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'That is not  the road that  you must take. I  have 
spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War is 
     upon us and all  our friends, a war in which only the use  of  the Ring 
could give us surety of victory. It fills me with great sorrow and great 
     fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am Gandalf, 
     Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.' 
     He rose and gazed out  eastward, shading his eyes, as if he  saw things 
far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head. 'No,' he  said 
in  a soft voice, 'it has gone beyond our reach. Of that at least let  us be 
glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring. We must go down to face a  
peril near despair, yet that deadly peril is removed.' 
     He turned. 'Come, Aragorn son of  Arathorn!'  he said. 'Do  not  regret 
your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil,  nor call it a vain pursuit. You  
chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the  choice  was just,  and it 
has  been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who otherwise might have met 
too late. But the quest  of  your companions is over. Your  next  journey is 
marked by your given word. You must go to Edoras and seek out Thjoden in 
his 
hall. For you are needed. The  light of And®ril must now be uncovered in the 
battle for  which it has so long waited. There is  war in  Rohan,  and worse 
evil: it goes ill with Thjoden.' 
     'Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?' said Legolas. 

####-     'I  did not say so,' said Gandalf. 'Who knows?  Have patience. Go where 
you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.' 
     'It is a long  way for  a man to walk, young or old,'  said Aragorn. 'I 
fear the battle will be over long ere I come there. ' 
     'We shall  see,  we  shall see,' said  Gandalf. 'Will you come now with 
me?' 
     'Yes, we will set out together,' said Aragorn. 'But I do not doubt that 
you  will  come  there before me, if you wish.' He rose and  looked  long at 
Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood there facing  one 
another. The grey figure of the Man, Aragorn son of Arathorn,  was tall, and 
stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of his sword; he  looked  as  if some 
king out of the mists of the sea had stepped upon the  shores of lesser men. 
Before him stooped the old figure, white; shining now as if with some  light  
kindled within,  bent, laden  with  years,  but holding a  power beyond  the 
strength of kings.  
     'Do I not say truly, Gandalf,' said Aragorn at last, 'that you could go 
whithersoever you wished quicker  than  I?  And this I also say: you are our 
captain and our banner.  The Dark Lord  has Nine. But we have One,  mightier  
than  they: the White Rider. He  has passed through the fire and  the abyss, 
and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.' 
     'Yes, together we will  follow you,' said Legolas. 'But first, it would 
ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you  in Moria. Will you not tell 
us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered?' 
     'I have stayed already too long,' answered Gandalf. 'Time is short. But 
if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.' 
     'Then  tell  us what  you will, and  time allows!'  said  Gimli. 'Come, 
Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!' 
     'Name him  not!' said Gandalf,  and for a moment it seemed that a cloud 
of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as death. 'Long 
time I fell,' he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back with  diffi culty. 
'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then 
we plunged into the deep water and all was  dark. Cold it was as the tide of 
death: almost it froze my heart.' 
     'Deep  is the abyss  that is spanned by Durin's  Bridge, and  none  has 
measured it,' said Gimli. 
     'Yet  it has  a  bottom, beyond  light  and  knowledge,'  said Gandalf. 
'Thither I came at last, to the  uttermost foundations of stone. He was with 

####-me still.  His fire was  quenched, but now he was a thing of slime, stronger  
than a strangling snake. 
     'We fought far under the living earth, where time is  not counted. Ever  
he clutched  me,  and  ever I  hewed  him,  till at last he  fled into  dark 
tunnels. They were not made by Durin's  folk, Gimli  son of   Gluin. Far, far 
below the  deepest delving  of the Dwarves, the world is gnawed  by nameless 
things.  Even Sauron  knows them not. They  are  older  than  he. Now I have 
walked there, but I will bring no report to darken the light of day. In that 
despair my enemy was my only hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel. 
Thus he brought me back at last to the secret  ways of Khazad-dym: too  well 
he knew them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.' 
     'Long has that  been lost,' said  Gimli. 'Many have  said  that it  was 
never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.' 
     'It  was made, and it had not been destroyed,'  said Gandalf. 'From the 
lowest dungeon to the highest peak  it climbed. ascending in unbroken spiral 
in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in  Durin's Tower  carved in 
the living rock of Zirak-zigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine. 
     'There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before it lay 
a  narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world.  The  sun shone 
fiercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud.  Out he sprang, and even 
as I came behind, he burst into new flame. There was none to see, or perhaps 
in after ages songs would still be sung of the Battle of the Peak.' Suddenly 
Gandalf laughed. 'But what would they say in song? Those that looked up from 
afar thought that  the  mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard, 
and lightning, they said, smote upon  Celebdil,  and leaped back broken into 
tongues of fire. Is not that enough? A great smoke rose about us, vapour and 
steam. Ice fell like  rain. I threw down my enemy, and he fell from the high 
place  and broke the  mountain-side  where  he  smote it  in his ruin.  Then 
darkness took me; and I strayed out  of thought and time, and I wandered far  
on roads that I will not tell. 
     'Naked I was sent back -- for a brief time, until my task  is done. And 
naked I lay upon  the mountain-top. The tower behind was crumbled into dust, 
the window gone; the ruined stair was choked with burned and broken stone. I 
was alone, forgotten, without escape upon the hard horn  of the world. There 
I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long 
as a life-age of the earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all 
lands: the springing and the dying,  the song  and the weeping, and the slow 

####-everlasting  groan  of  overburdened stone. And  so  at the last Gwaihir the 
Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away. 
     ' 'Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,' I said. 
     ' 'A burden  you have been,'  he answered, 'but not so  now. Light as a  
swan's feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines  through you. Indeed  I do 
not think you need me any more: were  I to let you fall you would float upon  
the wind.' 
     ' 'Do not let me fall!' I gasped, for I felt life in me again. 'Bear me 
to Lothlurien!' 
     ' 'That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent me to look  
for you,' he answered. 
     'Thus  it was  that  I  came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately 
gone. I tarried  there  in  the  ageless time of that  land where days bring 
healing  not  decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed  in white. Counsel I 
gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came, and messages I  bring 
to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to say this:  
     Where now are the D®nedain, Elessar, Elessar? 
     Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar? 
     Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth, 
     And the Grey Company ride from the North. 
     But dark is the path appointed for thee: 
     The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea. 
     To Legolas she sent this word: 
     Legolas Greenleaf long under tree 
     In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea! 
     If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore, 
     Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.' 
     Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.  
     'Then she sent me no message?' said Gimli and bent his head. 
     'Dark are her words,'  said Legolas, 'and little  do they mean to those 
that receive them.' 
     'That is no comfort,' said Gimli. 
     'What then?' said Legolas. 'Would  you  have her speak openly to you of 
your death?' 
     'Yes. if she had nought else to say.' 
     'What  is that?' said Gandalf, opening his  eyes. 'Yes,  I think I  can 
guess  what her  words  may  mean.  Your pardon,  Gimli! I was pondering the 

####-messages once again. But indeed she sent words to you, and  neither dark nor 
sad. 
     '  "To  Gimli son  of  Gluin," she  said,  "give  his   Lady's greeting. 
Lock -bearer, wherever thou goest  my thought goes with thee. But have a care 
to lay thine axe to the right tree!" ' 
     'In  happy hour  you  have returned to  us, Gandalf,'  cried the Dwarf,  
capering  as  he sang  loudly in the  strange dwarf-tongue. 'Come, come!' he 
shouted, swinging his axe. 'Since Gandalf's head is now sacred, let us  find  
one that it is right to cleave!' 
     'That  will  not  be far to seek,' said  Gandalf, rising from his seat. 
'Come!  We have  spent all  the time that is allowed to a meeting  of parted 
friends. Now there is need of haste.' 
     He wrapped himself again  in his old  tattered cloak, and led the  way. 
Following  him they descended quickly from the high shelf and made their way 
back through the forest, down the bank  of the Entwash. They  spoke no  more 
words,  until they stood again upon the grass  beyond the eaves of  Fangorn.  
There was no sign of their horses to be seen. 
     'They have not returned,' said Legolas. 'It will be a weary walk!' 
     'I shall not  walk. Time presses,' said  Gandalf.  Then lifting up  his 
head he gave  a long whistle. So clear and  piercing was  the  note that the 
others  stood  amazed to hear such a sound come from those old bearded lips. 
Three times he whistled; and then  faint and far off it seemed to  them that 
they heard the whinny  of a horse borne up from the plains upon the  eastern 
wind.  They waited wondering. Before long there came  the sound of hoofs, at 
first hardly more than a tremor of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as 
he lay upon the  grass, then  growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick  
beat. 
     'There is more than one horse coming,' said Aragorn. 
     'Certainly,' said Gandalf. 'We are too great a burden for one.' 
     'There are three,'  sa id Legolas, gazing out  over the plain.  'See how 
they run!  There is Hasufel, and  there is my  friend Arod  beside  him! But 
there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I have not seen his 
like before.' 
     'Nor will you again,' said Gandalf. 'That is Shadowfax. He is the chief 
of the  Mearas, lords  of horses, and not even Thjoden, King  of  Rohan, has 
ever looked on  a better. Does he not shine like silver, and run as smoothly 
as a swift stream? He has come for me: the horse of the White  Rider. We are 

####-going to battle together.' 
     Even  as the old wizard  spoke,  the great horse  came striding up  the 
slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane flowing in the wind 
of his speed. The two others followed, now  far behind. As soon as Shadowfax 
saw Gandalf, he checked his  pace and  whinnied loudly; then trotting gently  
forward he stooped his proud head and nuzzled his great nostrils against the 
old man's neck. 
     Gandalf caressed him. 'It is a  long way from Rivendell, my friend,' he 
said;  'but you are wise and swift and  come at need.  Far let us  ride  now 
together, and part not in this world again!' 
     Soon  the other horses  came up  and stood quietly  by, as if  awaiting 
orders. 'We go at once to Meduseld, the  hall of your master, Thjoden,' said 
Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their heads.  'Time presses, so 
with your leave, my friends, we  will ride. We beg you to use  all the speed 
that  you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli  
before me, and by  his leave  Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now 
only to drink a little.' 
     'Now I understand a part of last night's  riddle,' said Legolas  as  he 
sprang lightly  upon Arod's back.  'Whether they  fled  at first in fear, or 
not,  our horses met  Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with  joy. 
Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?' 
     'Yes, I knew,'  said the wizard.  'I bent  my thought upon him, bidding 
him to  make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south of this land. 
Swiftly may he bear me back again!' 
     Gandalf spoke  now to Shadowfax, and  the horse set off at a good pace, 
yet  not  beyond the measure of the  others. After a little while  he turned 
suddenly, and  choosing  a place where the ba nks  were  lower, he waded  the 
river, and then led them away due south into a flat land, treeless and wide. 
The wind went like grey waves through the endless miles of  grass. There was 
no sign of road or track, but Shadowfax did not stay or falter. 
     'He is  steering a straight course now for  the halls of Thjoden  under  
the slopes of the White  Mountains,' said  Gandalf. 'It will be  quicker so. 
The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies,  
across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.' 
     For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands. Often the  
grass was so high  that it  reached above the knees of the riders, and their 

####-steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea. They came upon many 
hidden 
pools, and broad acres of sedge waving above wet and  treacherous bogs;  but 
Shadowfax found the way, and the  other horses followed in his swath. Slowly 
the sun  fell from the sky down into the  West. Looking  out  over the great 
plain,  far away the riders saw it for a moment like a red fire sinking into 
the grass. Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red 
upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun's disc to the 
hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed down under the rim 
of earth. 
     'There lies the Gap of Rohan,' said Gandalf. 'It is now almost due west  
of us. That way lies Isengard.' 
     'I see a great smoke,' said Legolas. 'What may that be?' 
     'Battle and war!' said  Gandalf. 'Ride on!' 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. The King of the Golden Hall 

 
 
     They rode on  through sunset,  and slow dusk, and gathering night. When 
at last they  halted  and  dismounted,  even  Aragorn  was stiff and  weary. 
Gandalf only allowed  them a few  hou rs' rest. Legolas and  Gimli  slept and  
Aragorn lay flat, stretched upon his back; but Gandalf stood, leaning on his 
staff, gazing  into the darkness, east and  west.  All was silent, and there 
was no sign or sound of living thing. The night was barred with long clouds,  
fleeting on a  chill wind, when  they  arose again. Under the cold moon they 
went on once more, as swift as by the light of day. 
     Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would have fallen 
from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him. Hasufel and Arod, 
weary but proud, followed their  tireless leader, a grey shadow before  them 
hardly to he seen. The miles went by. The waxing moon  sank into the  cloudy 
West. 
     A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark  faded to 
a  cold grey. Red  shafts of light leapt  above  the black walls of the Emyn 
Muil  far  away upon  their  left. Dawn came clear and bright; a wind  swept  
across  their path,  rushing through the  bent  grasses.  Suddenly Shadowfax 
stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead. 
     'Look!' he  cried, and  they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood 
the mountains  of  the South:  white-tipped  and  streaked  with black.  The 
grass-lands  rolled against  the  hills  that clustered  at their feet,  and 
flowed up into many valleys still  dim and  dark, untouched  by the light of 
dawn,  winding  their way into the heart of the great mountains. Immediately 
before  the travellers the widest of these  glens  opened  like a  long gulf 
among the hills. Far inward they  glimpsed a tumbled mountain -mass with  one 
tall peak;  at the mouth of  the  vale there  stood  like  sentinel a lonely 
height. About its feet  there flowed, as a thread of silver, the stream that 
issued from the dale; upon its brow they caught, still  far away, a glint in 
the rising sun, a  glimmer of gold. 'Speak, Legolas!' said Gandalf. 'Tell us 
what you see there before us!' 
     Legolas  gazed  ahead, shading  his eyes from the  level shafts  of the 
new-risen  sun. 'I see a  white stream  that comes down from  the snows,' he  
said. 'Where it issues  from the shadow  of the vale a green hill rises upon 

####-the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle it. Within  there 
rise the  roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon a green terrace, there 
stands  aloft  a  great  hall of Men. And it  seems to  my eyes  that it  is 
thatched with gold. The light  of it shines  far over the land. Golden, too, 
are the posts of its  doors. There men  in bright  mail stand; but all  else 
within the courts are yet asleep.' 
     'Edoras  those courts are called,' said Gandalf, 'and Meduseld  is that 
golden hall. There dwells Thjoden son of Thengel, King of the Mark of Rohan. 
We  are come  with the  rising  of  the day.  Now the road lies plain to see 
before us.  But  we  must  ride  more  warily; for  war  is abroad,  and the 
Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, do not sleep, even if it seem so from afar.  Draw 
no  weapon, speak no  haughty  word,  I  counsel you all, until we  are come 
before Thjoden's seat.' 
     The  morning was  bright and clear about them, and birds were  singing, 
when the  travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly into the plain, 
and beyond the feet  of  the hills  turned across their path in a wide bend, 
flowing away east to  feed the Entwash far off in  its reed-choked beds. The 
land was green: in the wet meads and along  the grassy borders of the stream 
grew many willow-trees. Already in this southern land they were blushing red 
at  their fingertips. Feeling  the approach of spring. Over the stream there 
was a ford  between low banks  much trampled by the  passage of horses.  The 
travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading towards the 
uplands.  
     At the  foot of the  walled  hill the  way ran under the shadow of many 
mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass was white as with 
a drifted snow: small flowers  sprang there like  countless stars  amid  the 
turf. 
     'Look!' said  Gandalf. 'How fair are  the  bright  eyes  in  the grass!  
Evermind they  are called,  simbelmynl in this land of Men, for they blossom 
in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men rest. Behold! we are 
come to the great barrows  where the sires of  Thjoden sleep.' 'Seven mounds 
upon the left,  and nine upon the right,' said Aragorn. 'Many long  lives of 
men it is since the golden hall was built.' 
     'Five hundred times  have the  red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home 
since then,' said Legolas, 'and but a little while does that seem to us.' 
     'But  to the Riders of  the Mark it  seems  so long ago,' said Aragorn, 
'that  the  raising of this  house  is but a memory of  song, and  the years 

####-before are lost in the mist of time.  Now  they  call this land their  home, 
their own, and  their speech is sundered  from their northern  kin.' Then he 
began  to chant softly in a  slow tongue unknown to the  Elf  and Dwarf; yet  
they listened, for there was a strong music in it. 
     'That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,' said Legolas; 'for it 
is like  to  this land itself; rich and rolling in part,  and else  hard and 
stern as the mountains.  But I cannot guess what it  means, save  that it is 
laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.' 
     'It runs thus  in  the Common Speech,' said Aragorn, 'as near as  I can 
make it. 
     Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing?  
     Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing? 
     Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing? 
     Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing? 
     They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the meadow;  
     The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.  
     Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning, 
     Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning? 
     Thus spoke a  forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall  and 
fair  was Eorl the Young,  who rode  down out  of the  North; and there were 
wings upon the feet  of  his steed, Felaruf, father   of horses. So men still 
sing in the evening.' 
     With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the 
winding way  up the  green shoulders  of the hills, they came at last to the 
wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.  
     There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their feet and 
barred  the  way with spears.  'Stay, strangers here unknown!' they cried in 
the tongue  of  the  Riddermark,  demanding  the  names and  errand  of  the  
strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friendliness; and they looked 
darkly upon Gandalf.  
     'Well do I  understand your speech,' he answered  in the same language; 
'yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in the Common Tongue, 
as 
is the custom in the West, if you wi sh to be answered?' 
     'It is the will of Thjoden King that  none should enter his gates, save 
those who know our tongue and are our friends,'  replied one of the  guards.  
'None are welcome here in days of war but our  own folk, and those that come 

####-from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who are you that come heedless over 
the 
plain thus strangely clad, riding horses like to our own  horses? Long  have 
we kept  guard here,  and we  have watched you from afar. Never have we seen 
other riders so strange, nor any horse more proud than is  one of these that 
bear  you.  He is One  of the  Mearas, unless our eyes  are cheated  by some 
spell. Say, are you not a wizard,  some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of his 
craft? Speak now and be swift!' 
     'We are  no phantoms,' said Aragorn,  'nor do your  eyes  cheat you. For  
indeed these are your own horses  that  we ride, as  you  knew well are  you  
asked, I  guess. But seldom  does thief  ride  home to the  stable. Here are 
Hasufel and Arod, that Jomer,  the  Third Marsha l  of the Mark,  lent to us,  
only two  days ago. We bring them back now, even as we promised him. Has 
not 
Jomer then returned and given warning of our coming?' 
     A troubled look came  into the guard's eyes. 'Of Jomer I have naught to 
say,' he answered. 'If  what you tell me  is  truth,  then doubtless Thjoden 
will  have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked-for. It is 
but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and  said that by  the will of  
Thjoden no stranger should pass these gates. ' 
     'Wormtongue?' said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. 'Say no more!  
My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark himself. I am in 
haste. Will you not go or send to say  that  we  are come?' His eyes glinted 
under his deep brows as he bent his gaze upon the man. 
     'Yes,  I will go,' he answered  slowly. 'But what names shall I report?  
And what  shall I say of you? Old  and weary you seem now, and yet  you  are 
fell and grim beneath, I deem' 
     'Well do you see and speak,' said the wizard. 'For I am Gandalf. I have 
returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is Shadowfax the Great, 
whom no other hand can tame. And here beside me  is Aragorn son of 
Arathorn, 
the heir of Kings, and it is to Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas 
the Elf and Gimli the  Dwarf, our  comrades. Go now and  say to your  master  
that we are at  his gates and  would have speech with him, if he will permit 
us to come into his hall.' 'Strange names you give indeed! But I will report 
them as you  bid and learn my master's will,' said  the  guard. 'Wait here a  
little  while, and f will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do not 

####-hope  too much!  These are dark  days.' He  went  swiftly away,  leaving the 
strangers  in the  watchful  keeping of his  comrades. After  some  time  he 
returned. 'Follow me!'  he said. 'Thjoden gives you leave  to enter; but any 
weapon that  you bear; be it only a  staff, you must leave on the threshold. 
The doorwardens will keep them.' 
     The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking in file 
behind their guide. They found  a broad path, paved  with hewn  stones,  now 
winding  upward,  now climbing in  short  flights of well-laid  steps.  Many 
houses  built of wood and many dark doors they passed.  Beside the  way in  a 
stone  channel a stream of clear water flowed,  sparkling and chattering. At  
length they came to the crown of the hill. There stood a high platform above 
a  green terrace,  at the foot of which a bright  spring gushed from a stone 
carved in the likeness of a  horse's  head;  beneath was  a  wide basin from 
which the  water. spilled and fed the  falling stream. Up the  green terrace 
went a stair of stone, high  and  broad, and  on either side of the  topmost  
step were stone-hewn  sea,  There sat other  guards,  with drawn swords laid 
upon their  knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders the  sun 
was blazoned upon  their green shields, their  long  corslets were burnished 
bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than mortal men. 
     'There are the doors before you,' said the guide. 'I must return now to 
my duty at the gate. Farewell! And  may the Lord  of the Mark be gracious to 
you!' 
     He turned and went swiftly  back down  the road. The others climbed the 
long stair under the eyes of the tall  watchmen. Silent they stood now above  
and spoke no  word, until Gandalf stepped  out upon the paved terrace at the 
stairs head. Then suddenly with clear voices they spoke a courteous greeting  
in their own tongue. 
     Hail, corners from afar!' they said, and they turned the hilts of their 
swords towards the travellers in token of  peace. Green  gems flashed in the 
sunlight.  Then one of the guards stepped forward  and  spoke in  the Common 
Speech. 
     'I am the Doorward of Thjoden,' he said. 'Hbma is my name. Here  I must  
bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.' 
     Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver -hafted knife, his quiver and 
his bow. 'Keep these well,' he said, 'for they come from the Golden Wood and 
the Lady of Lothlurien gave them to me.' 
     Wonder came into the man's eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily by the  

####-wall, as if he feared to handle them.  'No  man  will  touch them  I promise 
you,' he said. 
     Aragorn stood a while hesitating. 'It is not my will,' he said,  'to put 
aside my sword or to deliver And®ril to the hand of any other man.' 
     'It is the will of Thjoden,' said Hbma. 
     'It is not clear to  me that the  will of Thjoden son of  Thengel  even 
though  he be lord of the  Mark, should  prevail over the will of Aragorn son  
of Arathorn, Elendil's heir of Gondor.' 
     'This  is the house of  Thjoden, not of Aragorn, even  were  he King of 
Gondor in  the seat of  Denethor,' said Hbma, stepping  swiftly  before  the 
doors  and barring the  way. His sword  was now  in  his  hand and the point  
towards the strangers. 
     'This is idle talk,' said  Gandalf. 'Needless is Thjoden's demand,  but 
it is useless to refuse. A king will have his  way  in his own hall,  be  it 
folly or wisdom.' 
     'Truly,' said Aragorn. 'And I would do as  the master of the house bade 
me, were this only a woodman's cot, if I bore now any sword but And®ril.' 
     'Whatever its name may be,' said Hbma, 'here you shall lay it,  if  you  
would not fight alone against all the men in Edoras.' 
     'Not alone!' said Gimli, fingering  the blade of his axe,  and  looking 
darkly up at the  guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a mind to 
fell. 'Not alone!' 
     'Come, come!' said Gandalf. 'We are all friends here. Or should be; for  
the laughter  of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel. My errand is 
pressing.  Here at least is  my sword, goodman Hbma. Keep it well. Glamdring 
it  is  called,  for the Elves made  it long ago.  Now  let me  pass.  Come, 
Aragorn!' 
     Slowly Aragorn unbuckled  his belt  and  himself set  his sword upright 
against the wall. 'Here I set it,' he  said; 'but I command you not to touch 
it, nor to  permit any other to lay hand on  it. In this elvish heath dwells 
the Blade  that was Broken and has been made again. Telchar first wrought it 
in the deeps of time. Death shall come to any man that draws Elendil's sword 
save Elendil's heir.' 
     The guard stepped back and looked with  amazement on Aragorn. 'It seems 
that you are come on the wings  of song out of the forgotten days he said. It 
shall be, lord, as you command. 
     'Well,' said Gimli, 'if it  has And®ril to keep it company, my  axe may 

####-stay here, too, without shame'; and  he laid it on the floor. 'Now then,  if 
all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.' 
     The guard still  hesitated. 'Your staff,' he  said to Gandalf. 'Forgive 
me, but that too must be left at the doors.' 
     'Foolishness!' said Gandalf. 'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is 
another. I am old. If I may  not  lean on my stick  as I go, then I will sit 
out here, until it pleases Thjoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.' 
     Aragorn laughed. 'Every man has something too dear to trust to another. 
But  would you  part an old  man from his suppor t? Come, will you not let us 
enter?' 
     'The staff  in the hand of a wizard may  be more  than a prop for  age' 
said Hbma. He looked hard at  the ash -staff on which Gandalf leaned. 'Yet in 
doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom. I believe you are friends 
and folk worthy of honour, who have no evil purpose. You may go in.' 
     The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung them slowly 
inwards grumbling on  their great hinges. The travellers entered. Inside  it 
seemed  dark and warm after the clear air  upon the hill.  The hall was long 
and wide and filled  with shadows and half lights; mighty pillars upheld its 
lofty roof. But  here and there bright  sunbeams fell  in glimmering  shafts 
from  the  eastern windows, high under the deep eaves. Through the louver in 
the roof, above the thin wisps  of  issuing smoke,  the sky showed  pale and 
blue.  As their  eyes changed, the travellers  perceived  that the floor was 
paved  with  stones  of  many  hues;  branching  runes  and strange  devices 
intertwined  beneath their feet. They  saw now that  the pillars were richly 
carved,  gleaming dully with gold and half-seen  colours.  Many woven cloths 
were hung upon  the  walls,  and over their  wide spaces  marched figures of 
ancient legend, some  dim with years,  some darkling in the shade. But  upon 
one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse. He was blowing a  
great horn, and his yellow hair was flying in the wind. The horse's head was 
lifted,  and its  nostrils were wide and red  as it neighed, smelling battle 
afar. Foaming water, green and white, rushed and curled about its knees. 
     'Behold  Eorl the Young!'  said Aragorn. 'Thus he rode out of the North 
to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.' 
     Now the four companions  went forward, past the clear wood-fire burning 
upon the long hearth in  the midst of the hall. Then they halted. At the far 
end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing north towards  the doors, was 
a dais with three steps; and  in the  middle of the dais was a great  gilded 

####-chair. Upon it sat a man so bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but 
his white  hair was  long and thick and fell  in great braids from beneath a  
thin golden circle set upon his brow.  In the centre upon his forehead shone 
a single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees; but his 
eyes  still  burned  with  a bright  light,  glinting  as  he  gazed at  the 
strangers. Behind his  chair  stood  a woman clad in white. At his feet upon 
the  steps sat  a  wizened  figure of a  man,  with  a  pale  wise face  and 
heavy-lidded eyes.  
     There was a silence. The old  man  did not move in his chair. At length 
Gandalf spoke.  'Hail, Thjoden son of Thengel!  I have returned. For behold!  
the  storm  comes,  and now all  friends should  gather together,  lest each 
singly be destroyed.' 
     Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short black  
staff  with a handle of  white bone; and now  the strangers  saw that,  bent 
though he was, he was still tall and must in youth  have been high and proud 
indeed. 
     'I greet you,'  he said,  'and maybe you look for welcome. But truth to 
tell your welcome is  doubtful here,  Master Gandalf.  You have ever  been a  
herald  of  woe. Troubles follow you like crows,  and ever  the oftener  the 
worse. I will  not deceive  you: when I heard that Shadowfax had  come  back 
riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but still more at the lack  
of the rider; and when Jomer brought the  tidings that you  had gone at last 
to your long home, I did not mourn. But news from afar is seldom sooth. Here 
you  come  again! And with you come  evils  worse  than before, as  might be 
expected. Why should I welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.' 
Slowly  
he sat down again in his cha ir. 
     'You speak justly, lord,'  said the pale man sitting upon the steps  of 
the  dais. 'It is not  yet five  days since  the  bitter  tidings  came that 
Thjodred your son was slain upon  the West  Marches: your right hand, Second 
Marshal Of the Mark. In Jomer  there  is little trust. Few men would be left  
to guard your walls, if  he had been allowed to rule.  And even now we learn 
from Gondor that the Dark Lord is stirring in the East. Such  is the hour in 
which this wanderer chooses to return. Why indeed  should  we  welcome  you, 
Master Stormcrow?  Lbthspell I  name you,  Ill-news; and ill news is  an ill 
guest they say.' He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment 
and gazed on the strangers with dark eyes.  

####-     'You are  held wise, my friend Wormtongue,  and are  doubtless a  great 
support to your master,' answered Gandalf in a soft voice. 'Yet in two  ways 
may a man  come with evil tidings. lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be 
such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.' 
     'That  is so,' said Wormtongue; 'but there is a  third kind: pickers of 
bones, meddlers in other men's sorrows, carrion-fowl  that grow fat  on war. 
What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now? 
It 
was  aid from  us that you sought last time that you were here. Then my lord 
bade you  Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and  to the wonder of 
all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to 
some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not  too great. 
I guess that it is  likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid 
rather than  render  it. Do  you  bring men?  Do you bring  horses,  swords,  
spears? That I  would call aid; that is our present need. But  who are these 
that  follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey,  and you yourself 
the most beggar-like of the four!' 
     'The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Thjoden son of 
Thengel,' said  Gandalf. 'Has not the  messenger from your gate reported the 
names of my companions? Seldom  has any lord of  Rohan received  three  
such 
guests. Weapons they have  laid at your doors  that  are worth many a mortal 
man, even the mightiest. Grey is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and 
thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.' 
     'Then it  is true, as  Jomer reported, that  you are in league with the 
Sorceress of the Golden Wood?'  said Wormtongue. 'It  is not  to be wondered 
at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.' 
     Gimli  strode  a pace forward, but felt  suddenly  the hand  of Gandalf 
clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone. 
     In Dwimordene, in Lurien 
     Seldom have walked the feet of Men, 
     Few mortal eyes have seen the light 
     That lies there ever, long and bright. 
     Galadriel! Galadriel! 
     Clear is the water of your well; 
     White is the star in your white hand; 
     Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land 

####-     In Dwimordene, in Lurien 
     More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men. 
     Thus Gandalf softly  sang, and then suddenly  he changed.  Casting  his 
tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned  no longer on his staff; and he 
spoke in a clear cold voice.  'The wise speak only  of what they know, Grnma 
son of Gblmud. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and 
keep 
your forked tongue behind  your  teeth.  I  have not passed through fire and 
death to bandy crooked words  with a serving-man till the  lightning falls.' 
He raised his staff.  There was a roll of thunder. The  sunlight was blotted 
out from the eastern  windows; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night. 
The fire faded to sullen embers. Only Gandalf could be seen,  standing white 
and tall before the blackened hearth. 
     In the gloom they heard  the hiss  of  Wormtongue's voice:  'Did I  not 
counsel you, lord, to forbid  his  staff? That fool, Hbma, has betrayed us!' 
There was  a flash as if lightning had cloven the roof. Then all was silent. 
Wormtongue sprawled on his face. 
     'Now Thjoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?' said Gandalf. 'Do 
you ask for help?' He lifted his staff and pointed to a  high  window. There 
the darkness  seemed  to clear, and  through the opening could be seen, high 
and far, a patch of shining sky. 'Not all is dark. Take courage, Lord of the 
Mark; for better help you will not  find. No counsel have I to give to those 
that despair. Yet counsel I could give, and words I could speak to you. Will 
you  hear them? They are not for all  ears.  I bid you come out  before your 
doors  and look abroad.  Too  long have  you sat in  shadows and  trusted to 
twisted tales and crooked promptings.' 
     Slowly  Thjoden left his  chair. A faint light  grew in the hall again. 
The  woman hastened to  the king's side, taking his arm, and with  faltering 
steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly through the hall. 
Wormtongue remained lying on the floor. They came to  the  doors and 
Gandalf 
knocked. 
     'Open!' he cried. 'The Lord of the Mark comes forth!' 
     The doors rolled  back  and a keen air  came whistling in.  A wind  was 
blowing  on  the  hill.  'Send your guards down  to the stairs  foot,'  said 
Gandalf. 'And you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.' 
     'Go, Jowyn sister -daughter!' said the  old king. 'The time for  fear is 

####-past.' 
     The woman turned  and went slowly into  the house. As  she  passed  the  
doors  she turned and looked back. Grave  and thoughtful  was her glance, as 
she looked on the king with cool  pity in her eyes. Very fair was  her face, 
and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and tall  she was in her  
white  robe girt with  silver; but strong she seemed and  stern as steel,  a  
daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the first time in the  full light of day 
beheld  Jowyn, Lady of Rohan, and thought her fair, fair  and cold,  like  a  
morning of  pale spring that  is not yet come to womanhood. And she  now was 
suddenly  aware  of  him:  tall  heir  of kings,  wise  with  many  winters, 
greycloaked.  Hiding a power that yet she felt.  For a moment still as stone 
she stood, then turning swiftly she was gone. 
     'Now, lord,' said Gandalf, 'look out upon  your land!  Breathe the free 
air again!' 
     From  the porch upon the top  of the high terrace they could see beyond 
the stream the green fields of Rohan fading  into distant grey.  Curtains of 
wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and  to the west was still 
dark with thunder, and lightning far away flickered among the tops of hidden 
hills. But the wind had shifted to the north, and already the storm that had 
come  out of  the  East  was  receding, rolling away  southward to  the sea. 
Suddenly through a rent  in  the clouds behind them a shaft  of sun  stabbed 
down. The falling  showers  gleamed  like  silver,  and  far away the  river  
glittered like a shimmering glass. 
     'It is not so dark here,' said Thjoden. 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor does age lie so  heavily on your  shoulders as 
some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!' 
     From the  king's hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones. He 
drew himself up, slowly, as a man  that is stiff from long bending over some 
dull toil.  Now tall  and straight he stood,  and his  eyes were blue as  he 
looked into the opening sky. 
     'Dark have  been  my  dreams  of late,' he said,  'but  I  feel as  one 
new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf. For I fear that 
already  you have come  too late, only to see the last days of my house. Not 
long now shall stand the high hall which Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall 
devour the high seat. What is to be done?' 
     'Much,' said Gandalf. 'But first send for Jomer. Do I not guess rightly 
that  you hold him prisoner,  by the counsel of Grnma, of him that all  save 

####-you name the Wormtongue?' 
     'It is  true,' said Thjoden. 'He  had rebelled against my commands, and 
threatened death to Grnma in my hall.' 
     'A man  may love you  and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels' said 
Gandalf. 
     'That may be. I will  do as you ask. Call  Hbma to  me. Since he proved 
untrusty  as a  doorward, let him  become an errand -runner. The guilty shall  
bring the guilty to judgement,' said Thjoden, and his voice was grim, yet he 
looked  at  Gandalf and  smiled and  as  he did so many lines  of care  were 
smoothed away and did not return. 
     When  Hbma  had  been  summoned and had  gone, Gandalf led Thjoden to 
a 
stone seat, and then sat  himself before  the  king upon  the topmost stair. 
Aragorn and his companions stood nearby. 
     'There is no time to tell all that you should hear,' said Gandalf. 'Yet 
if my  hope is not cheated, a time will come ere  long when I can speak more 
fully. Behold! you  are  come into  a peril  greater  even  than the wit  of 
Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see!  you  dream no longer. 
You 
live.  Gondor and  Rohan do not stand alone. The enemy  is strong beyond our 
reckoning, yet we have a hope at which he has not guessed.' 
     Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice  was low and secret, and none save 
the  king heard what he said. But  ever as he spoke the light shone brighter  
in Thjoden's eye, and at  the last he rose from his seat to his full height, 
and  Gandalf  beside him, and  together  they looked out from the high place 
towards the East. 
     'Verily,' said Gandalf, now in a loud voice,  keen and clear, 'that way 
lies our hope,  where sits our greatest  fear. Doom hangs still on a thread. 
Yet  hope  there  is  still, if we can  but  stand  unconquered for a little 
while.' 
     The others  too  now  turned their  eyes eastward.  Over the  sundering 
leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope and fear 
bore their thoughts  still on, beyond dark  mountains to the Land of Shadow.  
Where now was the  Ring-bearer? How thin  indeed was  the thread  upon 
which 
doom  still hung! It seemed to Legolas, as he  strained his farseeing  eyes, 
that he caught a  glint  of white: far away perchance the sun twinkled on  a  

####-pinnacle of the  Tower of Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet 
a present threat, there was a tiny tongue of flame. 
     Slowly  Thjoden  sat  down again,  as if  weariness still struggled  to 
master  him against the will  of Gandalf.  He turned and looked at his great 
house. 'Alas!'  he said, 'that these evil days  should  be  mine, and should 
come in my old  age instead of that peace  which  I  have earned.  Alas  for  
Boromir  the  brave!  The young  perish and the old  linger,  withering.' He 
clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands. 
     'Your fi ngers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped 
a sword-hilt,' said Gandalf. 
     Thjoden rose and put his  hand to his  side;  but no sword hung at  his 
belt. 'Where has Grnma stowed it?' he muttered under his breath. 
     'Take this,  dear lord!'  said  a  clear  voice.  'It  was ever at your 
service.' Two  men had  come softly up the  stair and stood now a few  steps  
from the top. Jomer was there. No helm was on his head, no  mail  was on his 
breast, but in  his hand he  held a drawn sword; and as he knelt  he offered 
the hilt to his master. 
     'How comes this?' said Thjoden sternly. He turned towards Jomer and the  
men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud and erect. Where was the 
old 
man whom they had left crouching in his chair or leaning on his stick? 
     'It is my doing,  lord,' said Hbma,  trembling. I understood that Jomer  
was  to be set free. Such  joy was in my heart that maybe I have erred. Yet, 
since  he was free again, and he  a  Marshal of  the Mark,!  brought him his 
sword as he bade me.' 
     'To lay at your feet, my lord,' said Jomer. 
     For a moment of silence Thjoden stood looking down at Jomer as he knelt 
still before him. Neither moved. 
     'Will you not take the sword?' said Gandalf.  
     Slowly Thjoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers  took the hilt, 
it seemed  to the watchers that  firmness  and strength returned to his thin 
arm. Suddenly he  lifted the blade  and swung it shimmering and whistling in 
the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang clear as he chanted in the 
tongue of Rohan a call to arms. 
     Arise now, arise, Riders of Thjoden! 
     Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward. 
     Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded! 

####-     Forth Eorlingas! 
     The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the stair. They 
looked at  their lord  in amazement, and  then  as one  man they  drew their 
swords and laid them at his feet. 'Command us!' they said. 
     'Westu Thjoden hbl!' cried Jomer. 'It  is a joy to us to see you return 
into your  own.  Never  again  shall it be said, Gandalf, that you come only 
with grief!' 
     'Take  back your sword, Jomer, sister -son!'  said  the king. 'Go, Hbma, 
and  seek my own sword!  Grnma has it in his keeping. Bring him to  me also. 
Now, Gandalf,  you said   that  you had counsel to  give, if I would hear it.  
What is your counsel?' 
     'You have yourself already  taken it,' answered Gandalf.  'To put  your 
trust in Jomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind.  To cast aside  regret 
and fear.  To do the deed at hand. Every  man that can ride should  be  sent 
west at once, as  Jomer counselled you: we must first destroy the  threat of 
Saruman, while we have time. If we fail, we  fall. If we succeed  -- then  we 
will  face the next task. Meanwhile your people tha t are left, the women and 
the children and the old, should stay  to the refuges  that  you have in the 
mountains. Were they not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let  
them  take  provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves  with treasures,  
great or small. It is their lives that are at stake.' 
     'This counsel seems good to me now,' said Thjoden. 'Let all my folk get 
ready! But  you my guests-truly you  said, Gandalf, that the  courtesy of my  
hall is  lessened. You have ridden through the night,  and the morning wears 
away.  You have had  neither  sleep nor food. A  guest -house  shall be  made  
ready: there you shall sleep, when you have eaten.' 
     'Nay, lord,' said Aragorn. 'There is no rest yet for the weary. The men 
of Rohan must ride forth today, and we  will ride with them, axe, sword, and  
bow. We did not bring them to rest against your wall, Lord  of the Mark. And 
I promised Jomer that my sword and his should be drawn together.' 
     'Now indeed there is hope of victory!' said Jomer. 
     'Hope,  yes,' said Gandalf. 'But Isengard  is strong. And  other perils 
draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Thjoden,  when we are gone. Lead your people 
swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!' 
     'Nay,  Gandalf!' said  the king.  'You do not know your  own  skill  in 
healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall  in  the front 
of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.' 

####-     'Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,' said Aragorn. 
The armed men that st ood  near clashed their weapons, crying:  'The  Lord of 
the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!' 
     'But  your  people  must  not be  both  unarmed and shepherdless'  said 
Gandalf. 'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?' 
     'I will take thought for that  ere I go,' answered Thjoden. 'Here comes 
my counsellor.' 
     At  that moment  Hbma  came  again from  the hall. Behind him  cringing  
between two other men, came Grnma  the  Wormtongue. His face was very 
white. 
His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Hbma knelt and presented to Thjoden a long 
sword in a scabbard clasped with gold and  set with green gems. 'Here, lord,  
is Herugrim, your  ancient blade,' he said. 'It was found in his chest. Loth 
was  he to render up  the  keys. Many other things are there which  men have 
missed.' 
     'You lie,'  said Wormtongue.  'And  this sword your master himself gave 
into my keeping.' 
     'And  he  now  requires  it  of  you again,' said  Thjoden. 'Does  that 
displease you?' 
     'Assuredly not. lord,' said  Wormtongue. 'I care for you and  yours  as 
best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your strength. Let 
others deal  with these irksome guests. Your meat is  about to be set on the 
board. Will you not go to it?' 
     'I will,' said Thjoden. 'And let food for my guests be set on the board 
beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all 
who dwell nigh!  Every  man and strong lad able to bear  arms,  all who have 
horses, let them be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from 
noon!' 
     'Dear  lord!'  cried Wormtongue.  'It  is as I feared. This wizard  has 
bewitched  you.  Are  none  to  be  left to defend  the  Golden Hall of your 
fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?' 
     'If this is bewitchment,' said Thjoden, 'it seems to me more  wholesome 
than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on 
all  fours like  a beast.  No, not  one shall be left, not even Grnma. Grnma  
shall ride too. Go! You have ye t time to clean the rust from your sword.' 
     'Mercy, lord!' whined Wormtongue,  grovelling on the ground. 'Have pity 
on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will 

####-stand by you  when all  others have gone.  Do  not send your  faithful Grnma  
away!' 
     'You have my pity,' said Thjoden. 'And I do not send you from my  side. 
I  go myself to  war with my  men.  I  bid  you come with me and prove  your 
faith.' 
     Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted look of 
a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He licked his lips with 
a  long pale tongue. 'Such a resolve  might be expected  from a lord of  the 
House  of Eorl,  old though  he be,' he  said. 'But those who truly love him 
would spare his failing years. Yet I  see that I come too late. Others, whom 
the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less, have already persuaded  him. 
If I cannot undo their work,  hear me at least in  this, lord! One who knows 
your mind  and honours your  commands shou ld  be  left in  Edoras. Appoint a  
faithful  steward.  Let your  counsellor Grnma  keep  all  things till  your 
return-and  I pray  that we  may  see it,  though no  wise man  will deem it 
hopeful.' 
     Jomer  laughed. 'And if  that plea does not excuse you  from war,  most  
noble Wormtongue,' he said, what office of less honour would you accept?  To 
carry a sack of meal up  into the mountains-if any man would trust you  with  
it?' 
     'Nay,  Jomer,  you  do  not  fully  understand   the  mind   of  Master  
Wormtongue,' said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him. 'He is bold 
and cunning. Even now he plays a game with  peril and wins a throw. Hours of 
my precious time he has wasted already. 'Down snake!' he said suddenly in  a 
terrible voice. 'Down on  your belly!  How long is it  since  Saruman bought 
you? What was  the promised price? When all the  men were  dead, you were to 
pick your  share of  the treasure, and take the woman  you  desire? Too long 
have you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.' 
     Jomer grasped his sword. 'That I knew  already,' he muttered. 'For that 
reason I would  have slain him  before,  forgetting the law of the hall. But 
there are other reasons.' He  stepped forward,  but Gandalf stayed him  with 
his hand. 
     'Jowyn is safe now,' he said. 'But you, Wormtongue,  you have done what 
you could for  your  true master.  Some reward you have earned at least. Yet 
Saruman is apt to  overlook his bargains. I should advise you  to go quickly 
and remind him, lest he forget your faithful service.' 
     'You lie,' said Wormtongue. 

####-     'That word comes too oft and easy from  your lips,' said Gandalf. 'I do 
not lie. See, Thjoden, here is a snake! With  safety you cannot take it with 
you,  nor can you leave it behind. To slay it  would be just. But it was not 
always as it now is. Once it was a man,  and did you service in its fashion. 
Give him a horse and  let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice 
you shall judge him.' 
     'Do  you hear this, Wormtongue?' said Thjoden. 'This is your choice: to 
ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go 
now,  whither  you will. But  then, if ever we  meet again, I  shall not  be 
merciful.' 
     Slowly Wormtongue rose. He  looked  at them with half-closed eyes. Last 
of all he scanned Thjoden's face and opened his mouth  as if  to speak. Then  
suddenly he drew  himself up.  His  hands  worked. His eyes glittered.  Such 
malice was in them that men stepped  back from  him. He bared his teeth; and 
then with a  hissing breath he spat before the king's feet, and  darting  to 
one side, he fled down the stair. 
     'After him!' said Thjoden. 'See that he does no harm to any, but do not 
hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.' 
     'And if any will bear him,' said Jomer. 
     One of the guards ran down the stair.  Another went to the  well at the 
foot of  the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he washed clean the 
stones that Wormtongue had defiled. 
     'Now my guests, come!' said Thjoden. 'Come and take such refreshment as 
haste allows.' 
     They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below them in  
the town the heralds crying and the  war -horns  blowing. For the king was to 
ride forth as soon as the  men of the  town and those dwelling near could be 
armed and assembled. 
     At the  king's  board sat  Jomer  and  the four guests, and there  also 
waiting  upon  the king was  the lady Jowyn. They ate and drank swiftly. The 
others were silent while Thjoden questioned Gandalf concerning Saruman. 
     'How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?' said Gandalf. 'He was 
not always evil. Once  I  do not doubt that he  was the friend of Rohan; and 
even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful still. But for long now 
he  has plotted  your  ruin, wearing the  mask of Friendship,  until  he was 
ready. In those years Wormtongue's task was easy, and all that  you did  was 
swiftly known in Isengard; for your  land  was  open, and strangers came and 

####-went. And  ever Wormtongue's  whispering was  in your ears,  poisoning  your 
thought, chilling your heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and 
could do nothing, for your will was in his keeping. 
     'But  when I escaped and  warned you, then the mask was torn, for those 
who would see. After  that Wormtongue played dangerously, always  seeking 
to 
delay  you, to  prevent  your full strength being gathered.  He  was crafty: 
dulling men's  wariness, or working on their fears,  as served the occasion. 
Do you not remember how eagerly  he urged  that no man should be spared on 
a 
wildgoose  chase  northward,  when  the  immediate  peril was  westward?  He 
persuaded you  to  forbid Jomer to pursue the raiding Orcs. If Jomer had not  
defied  Wormtongue's voice speaking  with your mouth, those Orcs would  
have 
reached Isengard by now,  bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which  
Saruman desires  above all else, but at the least two members of my Company, 
sharers of a  secret hope, of  which even  to you,  lord, I cannot yet speak 
openly. Dare you think of what they might now be  suffering, or what Saruman 
might now have learned to our destruction?' 
     'I owe much to  Jomer,' said Thjoden. 'Faithful heart  may have forward 
tongue.' 'Say also,' said  Gandalf,  'that to crooked  eyes truth may wear a  
wry face.' 
     'Indeed my eyes were almost blind,' said Thjoden. 'Most of all I owe to 
you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would give you a gift ere 
we  go, at your own  choosing. You  have only to name aught  that is mine. I 
reserve now only my sword!' 
     'Whether I came in time or not is yet  to be  seen,' said Gandalf. 'But 
as for your gift, lord, I will choose  one that will fit my need: swift  and 
sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was  only lent  before, if loan we may  call it.  
But now shall ride  him into great hazard,  setting silver against  black: I 
would not risk anything that is not my own.  And already there is  a bond of 
love between us.' 
     'You choose  well,' said Thjoden; 'and I give him now gladly. Yet it  is 
a great  gift. There  is none like  to Shadowfax. In him  one of  the mighty 
steeds of old  has returned. None  such shall  return again. And  to you  my 
other guests I  will offer such things as may be found in my armoury. Swords 
you  do  not need,  but there  are helms and coats  of mail of cunning work, 

####-gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they 
serve you well!' 
     Now men came bearing  raiment  of  war from  the  king's hoard and they 
arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they chose, and round 
shields: their bosses were  overlaid with gold and set with gems,  green and 
red  and white.  Gandalf took no armour; and Gimli needed no coat of  rings, 
even if one had been found to match his stature, for there was no hauberk in 
the hoards of Edoras  of  better make than his short corslet forged  beneath 
the Mountain  in the North.  But he  chose a  cap of iron  and leather  that 
fitted well upon his  round head; and  a small  shield he also took. It bore 
the  running  horse,  white upon green, that was the emblem of  the House of 
Eorl. 
     'May it keep you well!' said Thjoden.  'It was made for me in Thengel's 
day, while still I was a boy.' 
     Gimli bowed.  'I am proud, Lord  of the Mark, to bear your  device,' he 
said. 'Indeed  sooner would I bear a  horse than be borne by one. I  love my 
feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand and fight.' 
     'It may well be so,' said Thjoden. 
     The king now rose, and at once Jowyn came forward bearing wine.  'Ferthu 
Thjoden hbl!' she  said. 'Receive  now this  cup  and drink  in happy  hour. 
Health be with thee at thy going and coming!' 
     Thjoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the guests. As 
she stood before  Aragorn she paused suddenly and  looked  upon him, and her 
eyes were shining. And he  looked down upon her fair face and smiled; but as 
he took the cup, his hand  met hers,  and he knew  that she trembled at  the 
touch. 'Hail  Aragorn son of Arathorn!' she said. 'Hail Lady of  Rohan!'  he 
answered, but his face now was troubled and he did not smile. 
     When  they had  all drunk, the king went  down  the hall to  the doors.  
There  the  guards awaited him, and  heralds  stood, and all  the  lords and 
chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt nearby. 
     'Behold! I  go forth, and  it  seems like to be  my last riding,'  said 
Thjoden. 'I have  no  child. Thjodred  my  son  is  slain.  I name Jomer  my 
sister -son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a new lord as 
you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people that I  leave behind,  
to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?' 
     No man spoke. 
     'Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people trust?' 

####-     'In the House of Eorl,' answered Hbma. 
     'But Jomer I cannot spare, nor  would he stay,'  said the king; 'and he 
is the last of that House.' 
     'I  said not Jomer,'  answered Hbma. 'And he is not the  last. There is 
Jowyn, daughter of Jomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-hearted. All 
love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we are gone.' 
     'It shall be so,' said Thjoden. 'Let the heralds  announce to  the folk  
that the Lady Jowyn will lead them!' 
     Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and  Jowyn knelt before 
him   and  received  from   him  a  sword  and  a  fair  corslet.  'Farewell 
sister -daughter!' he said. 'Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall  return  to 
the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend themselves, 
and 
if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.' 'Speak not so!' she 
answered.  'A  year shall I endure  for every  day  that passes  until  your 
return.' But as she spoke her eyes went to Aragorn who stood nearby. 
     'The king shall come again,' he said.  'Fear not! Not West but East does 
our doom await us.' 
     The  king now went down  the stair  with Gandalf beside him. The others 
followed. Aragorn looked back  as they  passed towards the gate. Alone Jowyn 
stood before the  doors of the house at the stair's head; the  sword was set 
upright before her, and her hands were laid upon the hilt. She was  clad now 
in mail and shone like silver in the sun. 
     Gimli walked with Legolas. his axe on his  shoulder. 'Well, at last  we 
set off!' he said. 'Men need many words before deeds. My  axe is restless in 
my  hands.  Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are fell -handed when they 
come  to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare  that suits me. How shall I 
come to  the battle?  I  wish  I  could  walk and  not  bump like a sack  at 
Gandalf's saddlebow.' 
     'A safer seat than many, I guess,' said Legolas. 'Yet doubtless Gandalf 
will  gladly put you  down  on  your  feet  when  blows  begin; or Shadowfax 
himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.' 
     'And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not shave the 
scalps of Men,' said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe. 
     At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all ready in 
the saddle. More than a thousand were there mustered. Their spears were like 
a springing wood. Loudly and  joyously  they shouted as  Thjoden came forth. 

####-Some  held in  readiness the  king's horse, Snowmane,  and  others  held the 
horses of  Aragorn and Legolas. Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, bu t Jomer  
came up to him, leading his horse. 
     'Hail,  Gimli Gluin's  son!' he cried.  'I have  not had  time to learn 
gentle speech under your  rod, as you promised. But  shall  we not put aside  
our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood.' 
     'I will forget my wrath for  a while, Jomer son of Jomund,' said Gimli; 
'but if ever you chance to  see the Lady Galadriel with your eyes, then  you  
shall  acknowledge her  the fairest of  ladies, or our friendship will end.' 
'So be  it!' said Jomer.  'But  until that  time pardon me, and  in token of 
pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the 
Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.' 
     'I thank  you  indeed,' said Gimli  greatly   pleased. 'I will gladly go 
with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.' 
     'It shall he so,'  said Jomer. 'Legolas upon  my left, and Aragorn upon 
my right, and none will dare to stand before us!' 
     'Where is Shadowfax?' said Gandalf.  
     'Running  wild  over the grass,' they  answered.  'He  will let  no man 
handle him. There he goes, away down by the  ford, like a  shadow among  the 
willows.' 
     Gandalf  whistled  and called aloud the horse's  name,  and far away he 
tossed  his head and neighed,  and  turning sped  towards the host  like  an 
arrow. 
     'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would 
it appear,' said Jomer, as the great horse ran up, until he stood before the 
wizard. 
     'The gift seems already to be  given,'  said Thjoden. 'But hearken all! 
Here  now I name my  guest, Gandalf  Greyhame,  wisest of  counsellors; most  
welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while  
our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.' 
     'I thank you, Thjoden King,' said Gandalf. Then suddenly he threw  back  
his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to horseback. He  wore no 
helm nor mail. His snowy hair  flew free in the wind, his  white robes shone 
dazzling in  the sun. 
     'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.  
     'Our King and the White Rider!' they shouted. 'Forth Eorlingas!' 
     The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed.  Spear  clashed on  

####-shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush like the sudden onset 
of a great wind  the  last host of Rohan rode thundering into  the West. Far 
over  the  plain Jowyn saw the glitter of their spears, as she stood  still, 
alone before the doors of the silent house. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. Helm's Deep 

 
 
     The sun was  already westering as they rode  from Edoras, and the light 
of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden 
haze. There was  a beaten way,  north-westward  along the foot-hills  of the 
White Mountains,  and  this they  followed, up and  down in a green country, 
crossing small swift streams by many fords. Far ahead and to their right the 
Misty Mountains  loomed; ever darker  and taller they grew as the miles went 
by. The sun went slowly down before them. Evening came behind. 
     The  host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late, they rode 
with all the speed they  could, pausing seldom. Swift and  enduring were the 
steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to go. Forty  leagues  and more 
it was,  as  a bird flies, from Edoras to the fords of  the Isen, where they 
hoped to find the king's men that held back the hosts of Saruman. 
     Night closed about them. At last they  halted  to make their camp. They 
had ridden for some five hours and  were far out upon the western plain, yet  
more than half their journey lay still before them. In a great circle, under  
the starry sky and the waxing moon, they now made their bivouac. They lit no 
fires, for they  were  uncertain  of events; but they set a ring of  mounted 
guards about them, and  scouts  rode out far ahead, passing like shadows  in  
the folds  of  the land. The  slow night passed without tidings or alarm. At  
dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road again. 
     There were no clouds overhead yet,  but a  heaviness was in the air; it 
was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was  hazy, and behind it, 
following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing darkness, as of a  great 
storm moving out of the East. And   away in the North-west there seemed to be 
another  darkness brooding about  the feet of the Misty Mountains,  a shadow 
that crept down slowly from the Wizard's Vale. 
     Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Jomer.  'You have the 
keen  eyes  of  your fair  kindred, Legolas,' he said; 'and they  can tell  a  
sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder  
towards Isengard?' 
     'Many miles  lie between,' said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his 
eyes with his long hand. 'I can see a darkness. There  are shapes moving  in 
it,  great shapes  far away upon the bank of the river; but  what they are I 

####-cannot tell. It  is  not  mist  or  cloud that defeats  my  eyes: there is a  
veiling shadow that  some power lays upon   the  land, and  it marches slowly 
down  stream.  It  is as  if the twilight under  endless trees were  flowing 
downwards from the hills.' 
     'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'It will be 
a black night.' 
     As  the second day  of their riding drew on, the  heaviness in the  air 
increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them: a sombre 
canopy with great billowing  edges flecked with dazzling light. The sun went 
down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears of  the Riders were tipped with 
fire as  the  last shafts of light kindled the steep  faces  of the peaks of 
Thrihyrne: now very near they stood  on the  northernmost arm of  the  White 
Mountains, three jagged horns staring at  the  sunset. In the last red  glow 
men in the vanguard saw a black speck, a horseman  riding back towards them. 
They halted awaiting him. 
     He came, a  weary man  with dinted helm  and cloven shield.  Slowly  he 
climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At  length he spoke.  
'Is  Jomer  here?' he asked. 'You come at last, but too late,  and with  too 
little strength. Things have gone evilly since Thjodred fell. We were driven 
back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing. 
Then at  night fresh   forces  came  over  the river  against  our camp.  All 
Isengard  must  be  emptied;  and Saruman has  armed the  wild  hillmen  and 
herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We 
were overmastered. The  shield-wall was  broken. Erkenbrand of  Westfold has 
drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm's Deep. The 
rest are scattered. 
     'Where is Jomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead.  He should  return to 
Edoras  before  the wolves of Isengard come there.' Thjoden  had sat silent, 
hidden from  the  man's sight behind his  guards; now  he  urged  his  horse 
forward. 'Come, stand before me, Ceorl!'  he said. 'I am here. The last host  
of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.' 
     The man's face lightened with joy and wonder.  He drew himself up. Then 
he knelt,  offering his  notched sword to the king. 'Command  me, lord!'  he 
cried. 'And pardon me! I thought--' 
     'You thought I remained  in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter  
snow. So  it was  when you  rode  to war. But  a  west  wind has shaken  the  
boughs,' said Thjoden. 'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help 

####-of Erkenbrand!' 
     While Thjoden was speaking, Gandalf  rode a short way ahead, and he sat 
there  alone, gazing north  to Isengard and west to  the setting sun. Now he 
came back. 
     'Ride,  Thjoden!' he said. 'Ride to Helm's Deep! Go not to the Fords of 
Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a while. Shadowfax 
must  bear me now on a swift errand.'  Turning to Aragorn and Jomer  and the 
men of the king's household, he cried: 'Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till 
I return. Await me at Helm's Gate! Farewell!' 
     He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow  from the bow the gr eat 
horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash of silver in the 
sunset, a wind over the  grass, a shadow that fled  and  passed  from sight. 
Snowmane  snorted and reared,  eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the 
wing could have overtaken him. 
     'What does that mean?' said one of the guard to Hbma. 
     'That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,' answered Hbma. 'Ever he goes 
and comes unlooked-for:' 
     'Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain  'Said the 
other. 
     'True  enough,'  said Hbma; 'but for myself, I will  wait  until I  see 
Gandalf again.' 
     'Maybe you will wait long,' said the other. 
     The host turned away now from  the  road to the  Fords of Isen and bent 
their course southward. Night fell,  a nd still they rode on. The hills  drew 
near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening 
sky.  Still  some miles away, on  the far side of the Westfold  Vale,  lay a  
green coomb, a great bay in  the mountains,  out of which  a gorge opened in  
the hills. Men of that land called it Helm's  Deep, after a hero of old wars 
who  had  made  his refuge there. Ever steeper and narrower it wound  inward 
from  the  north  under the shadow  of the Thrihyrne, till the  crow-haunted 
cliffs rose  like mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light. 
     At Helm's Gate, before the  mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock  
thrust outward by the northern cliff. There  upon its spur stood  high walls 
of  ancient stone, and within them was a lofty  tower. Men said that  in the 
far-off  days of  the glory  of  Gondor  the  sea -kings  had built here this 
fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet 
sounded  upon   the   tower  echoed  in  the  Deep  behind,  as   i f  armies 

####-long-forgotten  were issuing to war from  caves beneath the  hills. A  wall, 
too,  the men  of old  had made  from the  Hornburg to  the  southern cliff,  
barring  the  entrance  to  the gorge.  Beneath  it by a  wide  culvert  the 
Deeping-stream passed out.  About the  feet  of  the Hornrock it wound,  and  
flowed  then in  a gully through the  midst of a wide  green  gore,  sloping 
gently  down  from  Helm's Gate  to  Helm's Dike.  Thence it  fell into  the 
Deeping-coomb and  out into  the Westfold  Vale.  There  in the  Hornburg at 
Helm's Gate Erkenbrand, master  of Westfold on the borders of the  Mark, now 
dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being  wise, he had repaired 
the wall and made the fastness strong. 
     The Riders were still  in the low valley before the  mouth of the Coomb, 
when cries and  hornblasts were heard  from their scouts that went in front. 
Out of the  darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout rode back and reported  
that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley, and tha t a host of Orcs and wild 
men were hurrying southward from the Fords of  Isen and seemed  to be 
making 
for Helm's Deep. 
     'We have found many of our folk lying slain as they fled thither,' said 
the scout. 'And we  have met scattered companies, going  this way  and that,  
leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand  none seem to  know.  It is likely 
that  he  will be  overtaken  ere he can  reach Helm's Gate, if  he  has not 
already perished.' 
     'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?' asked Thjoden. 
     'Yes,   lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a  horse,  passing 
hither and thither over the  plains like wind in  the grass. Some thought he 
was Saruman. It  is said  that he went away ere  nightfall towards Isengard. 
Some say also  that  Wormtongue was  seen  earlier,  going northward  with a 
company of Orcs.' 
     'It  will  go ill  with Wormtongue,  if  Gandalf  comes  upon  him said 
Thjoden.  'Nonetheless I miss now both my  counsellors, the old and the new.  
But in this need we have no better choice than to go on, as Gandalf said, to 
Helm's Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or no. Is it known how great is the 
host that comes from the North?' 
     'It is very great,' said the scout. 'He  that flies counts every foeman 
twice, yet I have spoken  to stouthearted  men, and I do not doubt that  the 
main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that we have here.' 
     'Then let us be swift,' said Jomer. 'Let us drive through such foes  as 

####-are  already  between  us  and the  fastness. There are caves in Helm's Deep 
where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up on to the hills.  
     'Trust not to secret ways,' said the king. 'Saruman  has long spied out 
this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us go!' 
     Aragorn and  Legolas went now with Jomer in the van. On through the dark 
night they rode, ever  slower as the darkness deepened and their way climbed 
southward, higher and higher into the  dim folds about the  mountains' feet. 
They  found  few of the  enemy before  them. Here and  there they came  upon 
roving bands of Orcs; but they fled ere the Riders could take or slay them. 
     'It will not be long I fear,' said Jomer, 'ere the coming of the king's 
host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain 
he has sent forth.' 
     The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the 
dark,  the  sound  of harsh  singing.  They  had  climbed far  up  into  the 
Deeping-coomb  when they looked back. Then they saw torches countless 
points 
of fiery light upon the  black fields behind, scattered like red flowers, or  
winding  up from  the lowlands in  long flickering lines.  Here and  there a  
larger blaze leapt up. 
     'It is a great host and follows us hard,' said Aragorn. 
     'They br ing fire,' said Thjoden,  'and they are  burning as  they come, 
rick, cot, and tree. This was  a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for  
my folk!' 
     'Would that day  was here and we might ride down upon them like a storm 
out of the mountains!' said Aragorn. 'It grieves me to fly before them.' 
     'We need not  fly much further,' said Jomer.  'Not  far ahead now  lies 
Helm's  Dike,  an  ancient trench  and rampart scored across the  coomb, two 
furlongs below Helm's Gate. There we can turn and give ba ttle.' 
     'Nay, we are too  few to defend the Dike,' said Thjoden. 'It  is a mile 
long or more, and the breach in it is wide.' 
     'At  the breach our  rearguard  must  stand,  if we  are pressed,' said 
Jomer. 
     There was neither star  nor moon when  the Riders came  to the breach in  
the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the road beside it ran 
down from  the  Hornburg. The  rampart loomed suddenly  before  them, a high 
shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode up a sentinel challenged them. 
     'The Lord of the Mark rides  to Helm's Gate,' Jomer answered. 'I, Jomer  

####-son of Jomund, speak.' 
     'This  is good  tidings beyond hope,' said  the  sentinel. 'Hasten! The 
enemy is on your heels.' 
     The host  passed  through the breach  and halted  on the sloping  sward 
above. They now learned to their joy  that Erkenbrand  had left  many men to 
hold Helm's Gate, and more had since escaped thither. 
     'Maybe, we have a thousand fit  to fight on foot,' said Gamling, an old 
man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. 'But  most of them have seen 
too many winters, as I have,  or too few, as my son's son here. What news of 
Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he was retreating hither with all  that 
is left of the best Riders of Westfold. But he has not come.' 
     'I fear that he will not come now,' said Jomer. 'Our scouts have gained 
no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us.' 
     'I would that he had  escaped,'  said Thjoden. 'He was a mighty man. In 
him lived again the  valour of Helm the Hammerhand.  But we cannot await 
him 
here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored?  
We bring  little  provision,  for we  rode forth  to open  battle,  not to a  
siege.' 
     'Behind us  in the caves  of the Deep  are  three  parts of the folk  of 
Westfold, old and young, children and women,' said Gamling. 'But great store 
of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been gathered there.' 
     'That is well,' said Jomer. 'They are burning or despoiling all that is 
left in the vale.' 
     'If they come to  bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a  
high price,' said Gamling. 
     The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed the  
stream they dismounted. In a long file they led their horses up the ramp and 
passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they were welcomed again with 
joy and renewed hope; for now there were men enough to man both the burg 
and 
the barrier wall. 
     Quickly  Jomer set his  men in readiness. The king and  the men of  his 
household  were  in  the   Hornburg,  and  there  also  were   many  of  the  
Westfold-men.  But on  the Deeping  Wall and its tower, and behind it, Jomer  
arrayed most of  the strength that he had, for here the  defence seemed more 
doubtful, if the assault were determined and in great force. The horses were 

####-led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared. 
     The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could  
walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet  over  which  only a tall  
man could look. Here and there were clefts  in the  stone  through which men 
could shoot. This battlement could be reached by a stair running down from a 
door in the outer court of the Hornburg; three flights of steps led  also up 
on to the wall  from the Deep  behind; but in front  it  was smooth, and the 
great stones of it were set with such  skill that no foothold could be found 
at their joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea -delved cliff.  
     Gimli  stood  leaning  against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat 
above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out into the gloom. 
     'This  is more to my liking,' said the dwarf, stamping  on  the stones.  
'Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good rock here. 
This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as we came  up from the 
dike. Give  me  a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place 
that armies would break upon like water.' 
     'I do not doubt  it,'  said Legolas.  'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves 
are strange folk. I do not like this  place, and I shall like it no more  by 
the light of  day.  But you  comfort me, Gimli, and I  am  glad  to have you  
standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more 
of your kin among us. But even more would I give  for a hundred good archers 
of Mirkwood. We shall need  them.  The Rohirrim have good bowmen after 
their 
fashion, but there are too few here, too few.' 
     'It is dark for archery,'  said  Gimli. 'Indeed it is  time  for sleep. 
Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never  I thought any dwarf could. Riding is 
tiring  work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give  me a row of orc-necks 
and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!' 
     A  slow time  passed.  Far down  in  the valley  scattered  fires still 
burned. The hosts of Isengard were  advancing in  silence now. Their torches 
could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.  
     Suddenly from the Dike yells  and screams,  and the fierce battle-cries 
of  men  broke  out. Flaming  brands  appeared over  the brink and clustered 
thickly at the  breach. Then they scattered and vanished. Men came galloping 
back  over the  field and  up the ramp to  the  gate of  the  Hornburg.  The 
rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in. 
     'The enemy is at hand!' they said. 'We loosed every arrow  that we had, 

####-and  filled the Dike with Orcs. But it will not halt them long. Already they 
are  scaling the bank at many  points,  thick as marching ants. But we  have 
taught them not to carry torches.' 
     It was  now past  midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the stillness 
of the  heavy  air foreboded storm.  Suddenly  the  clouds were  seared by a  
blinding flash. Branched lightning smote down upon the eastward hills. For a 
staring moment the watchers  on the walls saw all the space between them and 
the  Dike lit with white  light: it  was  boiling  and  crawling  with black  
shapes. some squat and broad, some  tall and grim, with high helms and sable 
shields. Hundreds and hundreds more  were pouring over the Dike and  through 
the breach.  The dark tide flowed  up to  the  walls  from  cliff  to cliff. 
Thunder rolled in the valley. Rain came lashing down. 
     Arrows thick  as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and fell 
clinking  and glancing on the stones. Some  found  a  mark.  The  assault on  
Helm's Deep  had  begun, but  no  sound  or challenge  was heard within;  no 
answering arrows came. 
     The  assailing  hosts halted, foiled  by the silent menace  of rock and 
wall. Ever and again  the lightning  tore aside the darkness.  Then the Orcs 
screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of arrows at any that 
stood  revealed upon the battlements;  and the men of the Mark amazed looked 
out,  as it seemed  to them, upon a great field of  dark corn, tossed  by  a  
tempest of war, and every ear glinted with barbed light. 
     Brazen trumpets sounded.  The enemy surged  forward,  some against  the 
Deeping Wall,  other  towards the causeway a nd  the ramp that led up to  the  
Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Orcs were mustered, and the wild men of the 
Dunland fells. A moment they hesitated and then  on they came. The lightning 
flashed,  and blazoned  upon  every helm  and  shield  the  ghastly  hand of 
Isengard was seen: They reached the summit of the  rock;  they drove towards 
the gates.  
     Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them,  and a hail of 
stones. They  wavered, broke, and fled  back; and  then charged again, broke 
and charged  again; and each time, like  the incoming sea, they  halted at a  
higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press of roaring  men leaped forth.  
They held their great shields  above them like a roof, while in  their midst 
they  bore two trunks of  mighty  trees.  Behind  them orc-archers  crowded,  
sending a hail  of  darts against the bowmen on the walls. They  gained  the 
gates. The  trees, swung by  strong  arms, smote the timbers  with a rending 

####-boom. If any man fell,  crushed by a stone hurtling  from above,  two others 
sprang to take his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed. 
     Jomer and Aragorn stood  together on  the Deeping Wall. They heard  the 
roar  of voices and the thudding of  the rams; and then in a sudden flash of 
light they beheld the peril of the gates.  
     'Come!' said Aragorn. 'This is the hour when we draw swords together!' 
     Running  like fire, they  sped along  the  wall, and up the  steps, and 
passed  into the  outer  court  upon the Rock.  As they  ran they gathered a  
handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that opened in an 
angle of the burg-wall on the west, where the cliff  stretched  out to  meet 
it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards the great gate, between the 
wall and the  sheer brink of  the Rock.  Together Jomer  and Aragorn  sprang 
through the door, their men close behind. The swords flashed from the sheath 
as one. 
     'G®thwinl!' cried Jomer. 'G®thwinl for the Mark!' 
     'And®ril!' cried Aragorn. 'And®ril for the D®nedain!' 
     Charging  from  the side,  they  hurled themselves  upon the  wild men. 
And®ril rose and fell,  gleaming with white fire. A shout went  up from wall 
and tower: 'And®ril! And®ril goes to  war. The Blade that  was Broken shines 
again!' 
     Dismayed  the  rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight;  but the 
wall of their shields  was broken as by  a  lightning-stroke, and  they were 
swept  away, hewn down,  or cast over the Rock into the stony stream  below.  
The orc-archers shot wildly and then fled. 
     For a moment Jomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was 
rumbling in  the distance now.  The lightning flickered still, far off among 
the mountains  in the  South. A keen wind was blowing from  the North again. 
The clouds were torn and drifting, and stars peeped out; and above the hills 
of  the  Coomb-side  the  westering  moon  rode,  glimmering yellow  in  the 
storm-wrack. 
     'We  did not come too soon,' said Aragorn, looking  at the gates. Their 
great  hinges and  iron bars were  wrenched and bent; many  of their timbers 
were cracked. 
     'Yet we cannot stay here beyond  the walls to defend them,' said Jomer. 
'Look!'  He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Orcs  and  Men 
were  gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows whined, and  skipped on  the 
stones about  them. 'Come! We must get  back and see what we  can do to pile 

####-stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!' 
     They  turned  and ran. At  that  moment some dozen Orcs that  had  lain 
motionless among  the slain  leaped  to their feet,  and  came  silently and 
swiftly behind. Two flung themselves to the ground at Jomer's heels, tripped 
him,  and in a moment they were on top of him. But a  small dark figure that 
none had observed sprang out of the shadows  and gave a hoarse  shout: Baruk 
Khazvd! Khazvd ai-mknu! An axe swung and swept back. Two Orcs fell 
headless.  
The rest fled. 
     Jomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid. 
     The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled inside 
with  stones. When all  were safe  within, Jomer turned: 'I thank you, Gimli 
son of Gluin!' he said. 'I did not know that you were with us in the sortie. 
But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?' 
     'I followed you to shake off sleep,'  said Gimli; 'but I looked on  the 
hillmen  and they seemed over large for me, so  I sat  beside a stone to see 
your sword-play.' 
     'I shall not find it easy to repay you,' said Jomer. 
     'There may be many a chance ere the night is over,' laughed the  Dwarf.  
'But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria.' 
     'Two!' said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place on the 
wall. 
     'Two?' said Legolas. 'I have done  better, though  now I must grope for  
spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But 
that is only a few leaves in a forest.' 
     The  sky  now  was  quickly clearing and the sinking  moon was  shining  
brightly. But the light brought little hope to  the Riders  of the Mark. The 
enemy before them seemed to  have  grown rather than diminished,  still more 
were  pressing up from  the valley through  the breach. The sortie  upon the 
Rock gained  only a  brief respite. The  assault on the gates was redoubled. 
Against the Deeping Wall the hosts of Isengard roared like a  sea.  Orcs and 
hillmen swarmed about  its feet from end  to end. Ropes with grappling hooks 
were hurled over the  parapet faster  than men could cut them  or fling them 
back.  Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down in ruin, 
but many more replaced  them, and Orcs sprang up them like  apes in the dark 
forests of the South. Before the wall's foot  the dead and broken were piled 
like shingle in  a storm; ever higher rose the hideous mounds, and still the  

####-enemy came on. 
     The men of Rohan grew weary.  All their arrows  were  spent, and  every 
shaft  was shot;  their swords were notched, and their shields  were  riven. 
Three  times Aragorn and Jomer  rallied them, and three times And®ril flamed 
in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall. 
     Then  a  clamour arose  in the Deep  behind. Orcs had crept  like  rats 
through the culvert  through  which the stream  flowed out. There  they  had 
gathered in the  shadow of the cliffs, until  the assault  above was hottest  
and  nearly all  the men of the defence had rushed to  the  wall's top. Then 
they sprang out. Already some had passed into the jaws of  the Deep and were 
among the horses, fighting with the guards.  
     Down from  the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce  cry  that echoed in  the 
cliffs.  'Khazvd! Khazvd!' He soon had work enough. 
     'Ai -oi!'  he  shouted.  'The  Orcs are  behind  the  wall. Ai -oi! Come, 
Legolas! There are enough for us both. Khazvd ai-mknu!' 
     Gamling the Old looked down  from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice 
of the  dwarf above all the  tumult.  'The Orcs are in  the Deep!' he cried. 
'Helm! Helm!  Forth Helmingas. he shouted as he leaped  down the  stair from 
the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back. 
     Their  onset was fierce and sudden, and the Orcs gave way before  them.  
Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, and all were slain 
or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the  guardians 
of the hidden caves. 
     'Twenty-one!'  cried  Gimli. He  hewed a two -handed stroke and laid the 
last Orc before his feet. 'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.' 
     'We must stop this rat-hole,' said Gamling.  'Dwarves  are  said  to be 
cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!' 
     'We do  not shape stone with battle-axes,  nor with our  finger -nails,' 
said Gimli. 'But I will help as I may.' 
     They  gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find  
to hand, and under  Gimli's direction  the Westfold-men blocked up the inner 
end  of  the  culvert,  until  only  a  narrow  outlet  remained.  Then  the 
Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned and fretted in its choked path,  
and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff. 
     'It will  be drier above,' said  Gimli. 'Come, Gamling, let us see  how 
things go on the wall!' 
     He  climbed up and  found Legolas beside Aragorn and Jomer. The elf was 

####-whetting his long knife. There was  for a while a lull in the assault, since 
the attempt to break in through the culvert had been foiled. 
     'Twenty-one!' said Gimli. 
     'Good!' said  Legolas.  'But my count  is  now  two  dozen. It has been 
knife-work up here.' 
     Jomer  and Aragorn  leant wearily on their swo rds. Away on the left the 
crash  and  clamour  of the battle  on the Rock rose  loud  again.  But  the 
Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea.  Its gates lay in ruin; 
but over  the  barricade of  beams and  stones  within no  enemy  as yet had 
passed. 
     Aragorn  looked at the pale stars, and  at the moon, now sloping behind 
the  western  hills that enclosed  the valley. 'This is a  night  as long as 
years,' he said. 'How long will the day tarry?' 
     'Dawn is not far off,' said Gamling, who had now climbed up beside him. 
'But dawn will not help us, I fear.' 
     'Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,' said Aragorn. 
     'But these creatures of  Isengard, these half-orcs and  goblin-men that 
the foul craft of Saruman  has bred, they will not quail at the  sun,'  said 
Gamling. 'And neither will  the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their 
voices?' 
     'I  hear them,' said  Jomer; 'but they are only the scream of birds and 
the bellowing of beasts to my ears.' 
     'Yet  there  are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,' said Gamling. 'I  
know that tongue.  It is an ancient speech  of men, and  once  was spoken in  
many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us, and they are glad; for 
our doom seems certain to them. 'The king the king!' they cry. 'We will take 
their king.  Death to the Forgoil!  Death  to the Strawheads! Death  to  the  
robbers of the North!'  Such names they have for  us. Not in half a thousand 
years have they forgotten their  grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the 
Mark to  Eorl the  Young and  made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman 
has  inflamed. They are fierce folk when roused. They  will not give way now 
for dusk or dawn, until Thjoden is taken, or they themselves are slain.' 
     'Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,' said Aragorn.  'Is it not said 
that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it?' 
     'So the minstrels say,' said Jomer. 
     'Then let us defend it, and hope!' said Aragorn. 
     Even as they  spoke there came a blare  of trumpets. Then there  was  a  

####-crash  and a flash of  flame and  smoke. The waters  of  the  Deeping-stream 
poured out  hissing and  foaming: they were choked no longer, a gaping  hole 
was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes poured in. 
     'Devilry of Saruman! ' cried  Aragorn.  'They have crept  in the culvert 
again, while  we talked, and  they have  lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our 
feet. Elendil, Elendil!' he shouted, as he leaped down into  the breach; but 
even as he  did  so  a hundred ladders were raised  against the  battlements.  
Over the wall and under  the wall the last assault came sweeping like a dark 
wave upon a hill of  sand. The  defence  was  swept away. Some of the Riders 
were driven back, further and further into the Deep, falling and fighting a s 
they gave way, step  by step, towards the caves.  Others cut  their way back  
towards the citadel. 
     A  broad  stairway,  climbed  from  the Deep  up  to the  Rock and  the 
rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood  Aragorn. In his hand still 
And®ril gleamed,  and  the terror of  the sword  for a while  held  back the 
enemy,  as one by one all who  could  gain the  stair passed up  towards the 
gate. Behind  on the upper  steps knelt Legolas. His bow  was  bent, but one  
gleaned arrow  was all that he had left,  and he  peered out now,  ready  to 
shoot the first Orc that should dare to approach the stair. 
     'All  who  can  have now got safe  within, Aragorn,' he  called.  'Come 
back!' 
     Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as  he ran he stumbled in his 
weariness. At once  his  enemies  leapt forward. Up  came the Orcs, yelling,  
with  their  long arms stretched out to  seize  him. The foremost  fell with 
Legolas' last  arrow in his  throat. but the rest sprang  over  him.  Then a  
great boulder, cast from the outer wall above,  crashed down upon the stair, 
and hurled them back into the Deep.  Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it 
clanged to behind him. 
     'Things go ill,  my friends,'  he said, wiping the sweat  from his brow 
with his arm. 
     'Ill enough,' said Legolas,  'but not yet hopeless, while  we have  you  
with us. Where is Gimli?' 
     'I do not  know.' said Aragorn. 'I last saw  him fighting on the ground 
behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.' 
     'Alas! That is evil news,' said Legolas. 
     'He is  stout and strong,'  said Aragorn. 'Let  us  hope  that he  will 
escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer than we. 

####-Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.' 
     'That must be my hope'' said Legolas. 'But I wish that he had come this 
way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.' 
     'If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your  count again,' laughed 
Aragorn. 'Never did I see an axe so wielded.' 
     'I must go  a nd seek some arrows,' said Legolas. 'Would that this night 
would end, and I could have better light for shooting.' 
     Aragorn  now  passed into the  citadel. There to his  dismay he learned 
that Jomer had not reached the Hornburg. 
     'Nay,  he did not come to the Rock,'  said one  of the Westfold-men,  'I 
last saw him gathering men about him and fighting  in the mouth of the Deep. 
Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not come to them.' 
     Aragorn strode  on  through  the  inner court,  and  mounted to a  high 
chamber in  the tower. There stood  the king, dark  against a narrow window, 
looking out upon the vale. 
     'What is the news, Aragorn?' he said. 
     'The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and  all the  defence swept away; but 
many have escaped hither to the Rock.' 
     'Is Jomer here?' 
     'No, lord. But many  of your men  retreated into the Deep; and some say 
that Jomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may hold back the enemy 
and 
come within the caves. What hope they may have then I  do not know.' 
     'More than we.  Good  provision,  it is said. And  the air is wholesome 
there because of  the outlets through fissures  in the rock  far above. None 
can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold out long.' 
     'But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc,' said Aragorn. 'They 
have a blasting fire, and with it they took the Wall. If they cannot come in 
the caves, they may seal up those that are inside.  But now we must turn all 
our thoughts to our own defence.' 
     'I fret in this prison,'  said Thjoden. 'If I could have set a spear in 
rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the  
joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.' 
     'Here at least you are guarded in the  strongest fastness of the Mark,' 
said Aragorn.  'More  hope we  have to defend you  in  the Hornburg than  in 
Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.' 
     'It  is said  that the Hornburg  has  never  fallen  to  assault,' said 

####-Thjoden; 'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once 
was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers 
and 
such reckless  hate? Had I known that the strength  of Isengard was grown so 
great, maybe  l should  not so rashly have ridden forth to  meet it, for all 
the arts of Gandalf. His counsel  seems  not now so good as it did under the 
morning sun.' 
     'Do not judge  the counsel  of  Gandalf, until all is over, lord,' said 
Aragorn. 
     'The  end will not be  long,'  said the king. 'But I will not end here, 
taken like an old badger  in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel  and the horses of 
my guard are  in the inner court.  When  dawn comes, I  will bid  men  sound 
Helm's horn,  and I  will ride forth.  Will  you ride  with me then, son  of 
Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth 
a song-if any be left to sing of us hereafter.' 
     'I will ride with you,' said Aragorn. 
     Taking  his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their 
circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the assault was hot.  
Legolas  went with  him.  Blasts of  fire leaped up from  below  shaking the 
stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders raised. Again and again the 
Orcs gained the  summit of the outer wall, and again the defenders cast them 
down. 
     At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless  of the darts  of 
the  enemy. As  he  looked forth he  saw the eastern sky grow  pale. Then he 
raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley. 
     The Orcs yelled and jeered. 'Come down! Come down!' they cried. 'If you 
wish  to speak  to us, come down! Bring out your  king!  We are the fighting 
Uruk-hai.  We will fetch him from his hole,  if  he does not come. Bring out 
your skulking king!' 
     'The king stays or comes at his own will,' said Aragorn. 
     'Then what are you doing here?' they answered. 'Why do you look out? Do 
you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the fighting Uruk-hai.' 
     'I looked out to see the dawn,' said Aragorn. 
     'What of the dawn?' they jeered. 'We are the Uruk-hai:  we  do not stop  
the fight for night or day, for fair  weather or for storm. We come to kill, 
by sun or moon. What of the dawn?' 
     'None knows what the  new day shall bring him,' said  Aragorn. 'Get you  

####-gone, ere it turn to your evil.' 
     'Get down or  we will shoot you from the wall,' they cried. 'This is no 
parley. You have nothing to say.' 
     'I have still this to say,' answered Aragorn. 'No  enemy has  yet taken 
the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not one will be left 
alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not know your peril.' 
     So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood there 
alone  above the ruined gates before  the host of  his  enemies, that many of 
the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to the valley, and  
some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Orcs laughed with loud voices; 
and a  hail of darts and arrows whistled over  the  wall, as  Aragorn leaped 
down. 
     There  was a roar and a blast of  fire. The archway  of the gate  above 
which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed  in smoke  and 
dust. 
The  barricade was  scattered as if  by  a thunderbolt. Aragorn  ran to  the 
king's tower. 
     But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs  about it yelled,  preparing to 
charge, a murmur arose behind them. like a wind in the distance, and it grew 
to a clamour of many voices crying strange news  in the dawn.  The Orcs upon 
the Rock, hearing the  rumour of dismay, wavered and looked back.  And then, 
sudden and terrible, from the  tower above, the sound  of the great horn  of 
Helm rang out. 
     All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Orcs cast themselves on 
their faces and covered their ears  with their claws. Back from the Deep the 
echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff and hill a mighty herald 
stood. But on the walls men looked up, listening with wonder; for the echoes 
did not die. Ever the  horn-blasts wound on among the hills; nearer now  and  
louder they answered one to another, blowing fierce and free. 
     'Helm!  Helm!' the Riders  shouted.  'Helm is arisen  and comes back to 
war. Helm for Thjoden King!' 
     And with that shout the king came. His horse  was white as snow, golden 
was  his shield,  and his  spear was long. At his  right  hand  was Aragorn, 
Elendil's  heir, behind him rode the lords of the  House of Eorl the  Young. 
Light sprang in the sky. Night departed. 
     'Forth Eorlingas!' With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down from 
the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they drove  through 

####-the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind them  from the Deep came 
the stern cries of' men issuing from the caves, driving forth the enemy. Out 
poured  all the men that were left upon  the Rock.  And  ever the  sound  of 
blowing horns echoed in the hills.  
     On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains  and champions fell  
or fled before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them. Their backs were to 
the swords  and  spears of the Riders and their  faces to  the  valley. They 
cried  and  wailed,  for fear and great wonder had  come upon  them with the  
rising of the day. 
     So King Thjoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to  the  great 
Dike. There the company  halted. Light grew bright about them. Shafts of the 
sun flared above the  eastern hills and  glimmered on their spears. But they 
sat silent on their horses, and they gazed down upon the Deeping-coomb. 
     The land had changed. Where before the green dale had  lain, its grassy 
slopes lapping  the ever -mounting hills,  there  now a forest  loomed. Great 
trees, bare and  silent,  stood, rank on  rank, with tangled bough and hoary 
head;  their twisted roots were buried in the long green grass. Darkness was 
under them. Between the  Dike and the eaves of that  nameless wood only  two 
open furlongs lay.  There now cowered  the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror 
of the  king and in terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm's Gate 
until all above the Dike was  empty  of them, but below it they were  packed 
like swarming flies.  Vainly they crawled and clambered about  the walls  of 
the coomb. seeking to escape.  Upon the  east  too sheer and stony  was  the 
valley's side; upon the left, from the west, their final doom approached. 
     There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in 
the rising  sun.  Over  the low hills  the horns were  sounding. Behind him, 
hastening down the long slopes,  were a  thousand  men on foot; their swords 
were in their hands. Amid them strode a man tall and strong.  His shield was 
red. As he came to the valley's brink, he set to his lips a great black horn 
and blew a ringing blast. 
     'Erkenbrand!' the Riders shouted. 'Erkenbrand!' 
     'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn. 'Gandalf is come again!' 
     'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!' said Legolas. 'This is wizardry indeed! Come!  
I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.' 
     The  hosts  of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning from 
fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down through the breach 
of  the  Dike  charged  the  king's  company.  Down  from  the hills  leaped 

####-Erkenbrand, lord  of Westfold. Down leaped Shadowfax, like a  deer that runs 
surefooted  in  the mountains. The White Rider was upon them, and the terror  
of  his coming filled  the enemy with  madness. The  wild men fell on  their 
faces before him. The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and 
spear. Like  a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they fled. Wailing they 
passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that shadow none ever  
came again. 
 

####- 

Chapter 8. The Road to Isengard 

 
 
     So it was that in the  light of a fair morning King Thjoden and Gandalf 
the White Rider met again  upon the green  grass beside the  Deeping -stream. 
There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and Legolas  the Elf, and Erkenbrand 
of Westfold, and the lords of the Golden House. About them were gathered the 
Rohirrim, the Riders of  the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and 
their eyes were turned towards the wood. 
     Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who 
had been driven back into the  Deep. There came  Gamling  the Old, and Jomer  
son of Jomund, and  beside them walked Gimli the dwarf. He had  no helm, 
and 
about his head was a linen band stained  with blood; but his voice  was loud 
and strong. 
     'Forty-two,  Master Legolas!' he cried. 'Alas! My  axe is  notched: the 
forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?' 
     'You have passed my  score  by  one,' answered Legolas. 'But  I  do not  
grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!' 
     'Welcome, Jomer, sister -son!' said Thjoden. 'Now that I see you safe, I 
am glad indeed.' 
     'Hail, Lord  of the Mark!' said Jomer. 'The dark night has  passed  and 
day has come again. But  the day has brought strange tidings.' He turned and 
gazed in wonder, first at the  wood and then at Gandalf. 'Once more you come 
in the hour of need, unlooked-for,' he said. 
     'Unlooked-for?' said Gandalf. 'I said that I would return and  meet you  
here.' 
     'But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your coming. 
Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf the White!' 
     'That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good 
counsel in peril, and made  use of the  speed of Shadowfax. Your  own valour 
has done more, and  the stout legs of the Westfold-men  marching through the 
night.' 
     Then  they all gazed  at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced 
darkly  at the wood,  and  passed their  hands  over their brows, as if they 
thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.  

####-     Gandalf laughed long and merrily. 'The trees?' he said. 'Nay, I see the 
wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond 
the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope 
the event has proved.' 
     'Then  if  not  yours,  whose  is  the  wizardry?'  said Thjoden.   'Not 
Saruman's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of  whom  we have yet 
to learn?' 
     'It is  not  wizardry, but a power far older,' said  Gandalf:  'a power  
that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang. 
     Ere iron was found or tree was hewn, 
     When young was mountain under moon; 
     Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe, 
     It walked the forests long ago.' 
     'And what may be the answer to your riddle?' said Thjoden. 
     'If you  would  learn  that,  you  should come  with me  to  Isengard ' 
answered Gandalf.  
     'To Isengard?' they cried. 
     'Yes,'  said Gandalf. 'I shall  return to  Isengard, and those who will 
may come with me. There we may see strange things.' 
     'But  there  are  not men  enough  in  the Mark,  not if  they were all 
gathered  together and  healed  of  wounds  and  weariness, to  assault  the 
stronghold of Saruman,' said Thjoden. 
     'Nevertheless  to Isengard I go,' said Gandalf. 'I shall not stay there 
long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the 
moon!' 
     'Nay!' said Thjoden.  'In  the dark hour  before dawn I doubted, but we 
will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.' 
     'I  wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be  now,' said  Gandalf, 
'and since he  has done you  great injury, it  would  be fitting if you were 
there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?' 
     'My  men  are weary with battle,' said the King; 'and  I am weary also. 
For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My  old age is not feigned nor  
due only to the  whisperings  of  Wormtongue. It is an ill that no leech can 
wholly cure, not even Gandalf.' 
     'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,' said Gandalf. 'We will 
journey under the shadow of evening. It is  as well;  for  it is my  counsel 
that all our comings and goings should be as  secret as may  be, henceforth. 

####-But do not command many  men to go with you, Thjoden. We go to  a parley 
not 
to a fight.' 
     The King then chose  men that  were unhurt and had swift horses, and he 
sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark; and 
they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young and old, to come in haste 
to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark  would  hold an  assembly  of all that 
could bear arms, on the second day after the full moon. To  ride with him to  
Isengard the King chose Jomer and twenty men of his household. With  
Gandalf 
would go  Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite  of his hurt  the  dwarf 
would not stay behind. 
     'It  was only a  feeble blow and the cap turned it;' he said. 'It would 
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.' 
     'I will tend it, while you rest,' said Aragorn. 
     The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quie t 
as he had not known for many years,  and the remainder of his chosen company 
rested also. But the others, all that  were not  hurt  or wounded,  began  a  
great labour; for many had fallen  in the battle and lay dead upon the field 
or in the Deep. 
     No  Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But  a great many 
of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid,  and cried for  
mercy. 
     The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set them to work. 
     'Help  now  to  repa ir  the  evil  in  which  you  have  joined,'  said 
Erkenbrand;  'and afterwards you  shall take an oath never again to pass the 
Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march  with the  enemies of Men;  and then you 
shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded  by Saruman. Many 
of  you  have got  death  as  the  reward  of your trust in him; but had you  
conquered, little better would your wages have been.' 
     The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told  them that the men 
of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive. 
     In the  midst of  the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised, 
and  beneath them  were laid  all  the Riders of the Mark who  fell  in  the 
defence, those of the  East Dales upon one side, and  those of Westfold upon  
the  other. In a_ grave alone  under the shadow  of  the Hornburg  lay Hbma, 
captain of the King's guard. He fell before the Gate. 

####-     The Orcs  were piled in great heaps, away  from the mounds  of Men, not 
far  from  the eaves of the forest. And the people  were  troubled in  their 
minds; for the  heaps of carrion were too great  for burial or for  burning. 
They had little wood for firing, and none would have dared to take an axe to 
the strange trees, even if Gandalf had not warned them to hurt  neither bark 
nor bough at their great peril. 
     'Let the Orcs lie,' said Gandalf. 'The morning may bring new counsel.' 
     In  the  afternoon the King's company prepared  to depart.  The work of 
burial was then but beginning; and Thjoden mourned for the loss of Hbma, his 
captain,  and cast the first earth upon  his grave. 'Great injury indeed has 
Saruman  done  to me and all  this land,' he said; 'and  I will remember it, 
when we meet.' 
     The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west  of the Coomb,  
when  at last  Thjoden and Gandalf and their companions  rode down from  the 
Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host,  both of the Riders and of the 
people of Westfold, old and young, women and children, who had come out 
from 
the caves. A song of victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell 
silent, wondering what would chance,  for their  eyes were on the trees  and 
they feared them. 
     The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and  man, they were 
unwilling  to  pass in. T he trees were grey and menacing, and a shadow  or a  
mist  was about them. The ends of their long  sweeping boughs hung down like 
searching  fingers, their roots  stood up from the ground like the  limbs of 
strange monsters,  and  dark  caverns opened benea th them.  But Gandalf went 
forward, leading the company, and where the road from  the Hornburg  met the 
trees they saw now an opening like an arched gate  under mighty  boughs; and 
through  it  Gandalf passed,  and they followed him. Then to their amazement 
they  found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream  beside it; and the 
sky was open above  and  full of golden light. But on either side the  great 
aisles  of the  wood  were  already  wrapped in  dusk,  stretching away into 
impenetrable shadows; and there  they  heard the  creaking  and  groaning of  
boughs, and far cries, and a rumour of  wordless  voices, murmuring angrily.  
No Orc or other living creature could be seen. 
     Legolas  and  Gimli were now riding  together  upon one horse; and they  
kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood. 
     'It is hot in  here,'  said Legolas  to Gandalf. 'I feel  a great wrath 

####-about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?' 
     'Yes,' said Gandalf.  
     'What has become of the miserable Orcs?' said Legolas.  
     'That, I think, no one will ever know,' said Gandalf. 
     They  rode  in silence for a while; but  Legolas was ever glancing from 
side to side, and would often have halted  to  listen to  the  sounds of the 
wood, if Gimli had allowed it. 
     'These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,'  he said; 'and  I have 
seen many  an  oak grow from acorn  to ruinous age.  I wish that  there were 
leisure now to walk among  them: they have voices, and  in time I might come 
to understand their thought.' 
     'No, no!'  said  Gimli.  'Let  us leave  them!  I guess  their  thought 
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their  speech is of crushing 
and strangling.' 
     'Not of all that go on two legs,' said  Legolas. 'There I think you are 
wrong.  It is Orcs that they hate.  For they  do not  belong  here and  know 
little of Elves and  Men. Far away  are the valleys where they sprang.  From 
the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.' 
     'Then that is the most  perilous wood in Middle-earth,'  said Gimli. 'I  
should  be grateful for  the part they have played, but I  do not love them. 
You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater wonder in this land, 
more beautiful than any grove or glade that  ever   grew: my  heart  is still 
full of ft. 'Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the 
marvels of the Northern  World, and what do they say of it? Caves, they say! 
Caves! Holes to fly to in time of  war, to store fodder in! My good Legolas, 
do you  know that the caverns of Helm's Deep  are vast and beautiful?  There 
would  be an  endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such 
things  were known  to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold  for a brief 
glance!' 
     'And I would give  gold to be excused,' said Legolas; 'and double to be 
let out, if I strayed in!' 
     'You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,' said Gimli. 'But you speak 
like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King dwells under  
the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their making long  ago? They are 
but hovels compared with  the caverns I have  seen here: immeasurable halls, 
filled with an everlasting music  of  water that tinkles into pools, as fair 
as Kheled-zvram in the starlight. 

####-     'And, Legolas,  when the torches are kindled and men walk  on the sandy  
floors  under  the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas,  gems  and crystals and  
veins of  precious ore  glint  in the polished  walls; and  the  light glows 
through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living hands of Queen 
Galadriel.  There are  columns of white and saffron and dawn-rose,  Legolas, 
fluted  and twisted into dreamlike forms;  they spring up from many-coloured 
floors to meet the glistening pendants  of  the roof:  wings, ropes, curtains 
fine as  frozen  clouds; spears,  banners, pinnacles  of suspended  palaces!  
Still lakes mirror them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered 
with clear glass;  cities.  such as  the  mind  of Durin  could  scarce have 
imagined in his sleep,  stretch  on through avenues and pillared  courts, on 
into  the dark recesses  where no light can come.  And  plink! a silver drop 
falls,  and the round wrinkles in  the glass make all  the  towers  bend and 
waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening comes: they 
fade  and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another  chamber and another  
dream. There is chamber after chamber, Legolas;  hall opening  out of  hall, 
dome after  dome,  stair beyond  stair; and still  the winding paths lead on 
into the mountains' heart.  Caves! The Caverns of Helm's Deep! Happy was the 
chance that drove me there! It makes me weep to leave them.' 
     'Then I  will wish you this fortune for your  comfort, Gimli,' said the 
Elf, 'that you may come safe from war and return to  see  them again. But do 
not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your 
account. Maybe the men of  this land  are wise  to say little: one family of 
busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.' 
     'No, you do not understand,' said Gimli. 'No dwarf could be  unmoved by 
such loveliness. None  of Durin's race would mine those  caves for stones or  
ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there.  Do you cut down groves  of 
blossoming trees in the spring-time for firewood? We would tend these glades 
of flowering  stone, not  quarry them. With cautious skill, tap  by tap  -- a 
small  chip of rock and no  more, perhaps, in a whole  anxious  day  -- so we 
could work,  and  as the  years went  by, we  should open  up new  ways, and 
display far chambers that  are still dark, glimpsed  only as a  void  beyond 
fissures in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps 
as once shone  in Khazad-dym; and when  we  wished  we  would drive away 
the 
night  that has  lain there  since the hills were made; and when we  desired 
rest, we would let the night return.' 

####-     'You  move me, Gimli,' said Legolas. 'I have never heard you speak like 
this  before. Almost you make  me regret that  I  have not seen these caves.  
Come! Let us make this bargain-if we both return safe out of the perils that 
await us, we will journey for a while together. You shall visit Fangorn with 
me, and then I will come with you to see Helm's Deep.' 
     'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,' said Gimli. 
'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves 
and share their wonder with me.' 
     'You have  my promise,' said Legolas. 'But  alas!  Now  we  must  leave 
behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We  are coming to the end of the 
trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?' 
     'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.' said Gandalf:  
'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to  the Fords: and ten more from there 
to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.' 
     'And  when we come there,  what shall  we see?'  asked Gimli. 'You  may 
know, but I cannot guess.' 
     'I do  not know myself for certain,'  answered the wizard. 'I was there 
at  nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet  I think that 
you will not say that the journey was  in vain  -- not though the Glittering 
Caves of Aglarond be left behind.' 
     At last the company passed  through  the trees, and found that they had 
come to the bottom of the Coomb, where  the road from Helm's  Deep 
branched, 
going one way east to  Edoras,  and the other north to the Fords of Isen. As 
they  rode from under the eaves of the wood, Legolas  halted and looked back 
with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry. 
     'There are eyes!' he said.  'Eyes looking out  from the shadows  of the 
boughs! I never saw such eyes before.' 
     The others,  surprised  by  his cry,  halted  and turned;  but  Legolas 
started to ride back. 
     'No, no!' cried Gimli. 'Do  as  you please in your madness,  but let me 
first get  down  from  this horse! I wish  to see  no eyes!' 'Stay,  Legolas 
Greenleaf!' said Gandalf. 'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not 
your time.' 
     Even as he spoke,  there came forward out of  the  trees three  strange 
shapes.  As  tall as trolls they were, twelve feet  or more in height; their 
strong bodies, stout as  young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment or with 

####-hide of close-fitting grey and br own. Their limbs were long, and their hands 
had many fingers; their hair was stiff, and their beards grey-green as moss.  
They gazed out with solemn  eyes, but they were not  looking at the  riders:  
their eyes were bent northwards.  Suddenly they  lifted their long  hands to 
their  mouths, and  sent forth ringing calls, clear as notes  of a horn, but 
more musical and various.  The calls  were answered; and turning  again, the  
riders  saw other creatures of the same  kind approaching, striding  through 
the grass. They came swiftly from the North, walking  like wading herons  in 
their gait,  but not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat 
quicker than the heron's  wings.  The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some 
set their hands upon their swor d-hilts. 
     'You need no  weapons,' said Gandalf. 'These are but herdsmen. They are 
not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.' 
     So  it  seemed to be;  for  as  he spoke the tall creatures,  without a  
glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished. 
     'Herdsmen!'  said  Thjoden. 'Where  are their  flocks? What  are  they, 
Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.' 
     'They are the shepherds of the trees,' answered Gandalf. 'Is it so long 
since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land 
who, out  of the twisted  threads of story, could pick the  answer  to  your 
question. You have seen  Ents, O King, Ents out of  Fangorn Forest, which in 
your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only 
in  idle  fancy?  Nay, Thjoden,  it is otherwise: to  them  you are  but the 
passing tale;  all the years from Eorl the Young to Thjoden  the  Old are of 
little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.' 
     The king was silent. 'Ents!' he said at  length. 'Out of the shadows of 
legend I  begin a little to  understand the marvel  of the trees, I think. I 
have  lived  to see  strange  days. Long  we have tended our beasts  and our 
fields, built our houses, wrought  our tools, or ridden away to help in  the 
wars  of  Minas Tirith. And that we called  the life of Men,  the way of the 
world. We cared little for what lay beyond the borders of our land. Songs we 
have that  tell of these things, but we are forgetting them,  teaching  them 
only  to children, as  a careless custom. And now  the  songs have come down 
among us out of strange places, and walk visible under the Sun.' 
     'You should  be  glad, Thjoden  King,' said Gandalf. 'For not only  the 
little  life  of Men is  now endangered, but the  life also of  those things 
which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even 

####-if you know them not.' 
     'Yet  also I should  be sad,' said Thjoden. 'For however the fortune of 
war shall go, may it not so end  that much that was fair and wonderful shall 
pass for ever out of Middle-earth?' 
     'It may,' said Gandalf. 'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor  
made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on 
with the journey we have begun!' 
     The company turned then away from the  Coomb and from the wood and 
took  
the  road  towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set, 
already  it had sunk behind the rim of the world; but  as they rode out from 
the shadow of  the  hills  and looked west to the  Gap  of Rohan the sky was 
still  red, and a burning light was under the  floating clouds. Dark against  
it there wheeled and flew many black -winged birds. Some passed overhead 
wi th 
mournful cries, returning to their homes among the rocks. 
     'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,' said Jomer. 
     They rode now at an easy pace and dark came  down upon the plains about 
them. The slow moon mounted,  now  waxing towards the full, and  in its cold 
silver light the swelling grass-lands  rose and fell  like a wide  grey sea. 
They  had ridden for  some four  hours from  the branching of the roads when 
they drew near to the Fords. Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river  
spread  in stony shoals  between high grassy terraces. Borne upon  the  wind 
they heard the howling of  wolves. Their hearts were heavy,  remembering the 
many men that had fallen in battle in this place. 
     The  road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the 
terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further side. There were 
three  lines of flat stepping-stones  across  the  stream,  and between them 
fords for horses, that went from either brink to a  bare  eyot in the midst. 
The riders looked down upon the crossings,  and  it seemed strange to  them;  
for the Fords had ever been a place full  of the rush  and  chatter of water  
upon stones; but now they  were  silent. The beds of the  stream were almost  
dry, a bare wast e of shingles and grey sand. 
     'This  is  become  a  dreary  place,'  said Jomer. 'What  sickness  has 
befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has  destroyed: has he devoured 
the springs of Isen too?' 'So it would seem,' said Gandalf. 
     'Alas!'  said Thjoden. 'Must we pass this way,  where the carrion-beasts 

####-devour so many good Riders of the Mark?' 
     'This is our way,' said Gandalf. 'Grievous is the fall of your men; but 
you shall see that at least the wolves  of the mountains do not devour them. 
It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their feast:  such indeed 
is the friendship of their kind. Come!' 
     They rode down to the river,  and as  they came the wolves ceased their 
howling and  slunk away. Fear  fell on them seeing Gandalf in the moon,  and 
Shadowfax his horse shining like  silver.  The  riders  passed  over to  the 
islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from the shadows of the banks. 
     'Look!' said Gandalf. 'Friends have laboured here.' 
     And they saw that  in  the midst  of the eyot  a mound was piled, ringed 
with stones, and set about with many spears. 
     'Here  lie  all the  Men of the Mark that fell  near this place,'  said 
Gandalf. 
     'Here let them rest!' said Jomer. 'And when  their  spears  have rotted 
and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!' 
     'Is  this  your work  also, Gandalf,  my  friend?'  said Thjoden.  'You  
accomplished much in an evening and a night!' 
     'With  the help of Shadowfax  -- and others,' said Gandalf. 'I rode fast  
and  far.  But here beside the  mound I will say this for your comfort: many 
fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour made them. More were 
scattered than were slain;  I gathered together all that I  could find. Some 
men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold  to join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make 
this burial. They  have now followed your marshal,  Elfhelm. I sent him with 
many Riders  to Edoras.  Saruman  I  knew had  despatched  his full strength 
against you, and his  servants  had turned aside from all  other errands and 
gone to Helm's Deep: the  lands seemed empty  of enemies; yet I  feared that 
wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless  to Meduseld, while it was 
undefended. But now I  think you need not fear:  you will find your house to 
welcome your return.' 
     'And glad shall I be to see it again,' said Thjoden, 'though brief now, 
I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.' 
     With that the  company said  farewell to the island  and the mound, and 
passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they rode on, glad 
to have left the mournful  Fords. As they  went  the  howling of the  wolves 
broke out anew. 
     There  was an  ancient highway that  ran  down  from  Isengard  to  the 

####-crossings. For some way i t took its course beside the river, bending with it 
east  and  then north; but at  the last it  turned away  and  went  straight 
towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the mountain-side in the  
west of the valley, sixteen miles  or more from its mouth.  This  road  they 
followed but they  did not ride upon it;  for the ground beside it  was firm 
and level, covered for many miles about with short springing turf. They rode  
now more swiftly, and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind. 
Then they halted, ending their night's journey, for the King was weary. They 
were come to  the feet  of the  Misty  Mountains, and the long  arms of  Nan 
Curunnr stretched down to  meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the 
moon had  passed  into  the West, and its light was hidden by the hills. But 
out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour; as 
it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and spread in shimmering 
billows, black and silver, over the starry sky. 
     'What do you  think  of that,  Gandalf?' asked Aragorn.  'One would say 
that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.' 
     'There  is ever a fume above  that  valley in these  days,' said Jomer: 
'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are  steams rather than 
smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all 
the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.' 
     'Maybe he is,' said Gandalf. 'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing. 
Now let us rest for a while,  if we can.' 
     They camped  beside  the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and 
empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the watchmen cried 
out, and all awoke. The moon was gone.  Stars were  shining  above; but over 
the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night.  On both  sides of 
the river it rolled towards them, going northward. 
     'Stay where you are!' said Gandalf. 'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will 
pass you by!' 
     A mist gathered about  them. Above  them a  few stars  still  glimmered 
faintly;  but  on either side there arose  walls of impenetrable gloom; they 
were in a narrow  lane between moving towers of shadow. Voices  they  heard, 
whisperings  and groanings and an  endless  rustling sigh;  the  earth shook 
under them. Long  it  seemed to them that they sat  and  were afraid; but at 
last the darkness and the rumour passed, and vanished between the mountain's 
arms. 
     Away south upon the Hornburg, in the  middle  night  men heard a  great 

####-noise, as a wind  in the valley, and the ground trembled; and all were afraid 
and no one ventured to go forth. But in the morning  they went  out and were 
amazed; for  the slain Orcs were gone, and the trees also. Far down into the 
valley of the Deep  the grass was crushed   and trampled brown,  as if  giant 
herdsmen had  pastured  great droves of  cattle there;  but a mile below the 
Dike a huge pit had  been delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled 
into  a  hill.  Men believed that the Orcs whom they had  slain  were buried 
there;  but whether those  who had  fled into  the wood were with them, none 
could say, for no man  ever  set foot upon that hill. The Death Down it  was 
afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the strange trees were 
never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had  returned at night, and had gone 
far  away to the dark dales  of  Fangorn.  Thus they were  revenged upon the 
Orcs. 
     The king  and his company slept  no more that  night;  but they saw and 
heard  no other strange thing,  sa ve one: the voice of the river beside them 
suddenly  awoke. There  was a  rush of water hurrying down among the stones;  
and when it had  passed, the Isen flowed and bubbled in its bed again, as it 
had ever done. 
     At  dawn  they made ready to go on. The light came grey  and pale,  and 
they  did  not see  the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy with fog, 
and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly, riding now upon the 
highway.  It  was broad and  hard, and  well -tended. Dimly through the mists 
they could  descry the long arm of the mountains rising on  their left. They 
had passed into Nan Curunnr, the Wizard's Vale. That was a sheltered valley, 
open only to the South. Once  it had been fair and green, and through it the 
Isen flowed, already deep and strong before it found  the plains; for it was 
fed by many springs and lesser streams among  the rain-washed hills. and all  
about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land. 
     It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres 
tilled  by  the  slaves  of Saruman;  but  most  of the valley had  become a  
wilderness of  weeds and  thorns.  Brambles  trailed  upon  the  ground,  or 
clambering over bush and  bank, made shaggy caves where small beasts 
housed. 
No  trees grew there; but among  the rank  grasses  could still be  seen the 
burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves. It  was  a sad country, silent  
now  but for the stony noise  of quick  waters. Smokes and steams drifted in  
sullen clouds and lurked  in the  hollows.  The  riders did  not speak.  Many 

####-doubted in their hearts, wondering to what dismal end their journey led. 
     After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street,  
paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill; no blade of  grass 
was seen in any joint. Deep  gutters, filled with  trickling water. ran down 
on either side. Suddenly  a tall pillar loomed up before them. It was black; 
and set upon it was a great stone, carved and painted in the likeness  of  a  
long  White Hand. Its finger pointed north. Not far now they knew  that  the 
gates of Isengard  must stand, and  their hearts  were heavy; but their eyes 
could not pierce the mists ahead. 
     Beneath  the  mountain's  arm within  the  Wizard's Vale through  years 
uncounted had stood that ancient place that  Men called Isengard.  Partly it 
was shaped  in  the making of  the mountains, but  mighty works  the  Men of 
Westernesse had wrought there of  old; and Saruman  had dwelt there long and 
had not been idle. 
     This  was  its fashion,  while Saruman was at  his height, accounted by 
many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering cliffs, 
stood out from the shelter of the mountain-side, from which it ran  and then 
returned again. One entrance only was there made in  it, a great arch delved 
in the  southern wall. Here  through the black  rock a long  tunnel had been 
hewn, closed at either end with mighty  doors of iron.  They were so wrought 
and poised upon their  huge hinges, posts of  steel driven  into the  living 
stone, that  when unbarred they could  be moved with  a light  thrust of the 
arms, noiselessly. One who passed in and came at length out of  the  echoing  
tunnel,  beheld a  plain,  a great  circle, somewhat  hollowed  like a  vast  
shallow bowl: a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and 
filled  with avenues, and  groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams that 
flowed  from the mountains to  a lake. But no green thing grew there  in the 
latter  days of Saruman. The  roads wer e  paved with stone-flags,  dark  and 
hard;  and beside their borders instead of trees there marched long lines of 
pillars, some of marble, some of copper and of iron. joined by heavy chains.  
     Many  houses  there  were,  chambers,  halls,  and  passages,  cut  and 
tunnelled back into the  walls upon their  inner side, so that all  the open 
circle  was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors. Thousands  could 
dwell  there,  workers, servants, slaves, and warriors with  great  store of 
arms; wolves  were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath. The plain, too, was 
bored and delved. Shafts were driven deep into the  ground; their upper ends  
were  covered by low mounds and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the 

####-Ring  of Isengard looked like a  graveyard  of  unquiet dead. For the ground  
trembled. The shafts  ran  down by many slopes and  spiral stairs to caverns 
far under; there Saruman had treasuries,  store-houses, armouries, smithies,  
and  great  furnaces.  Iron  wheels  revolved  there endlessly, and  hammers 
thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the vents, lit  from beneath 
with red light, or blue, or venomous green. 
     To the  centre  all the roads ran between  their chains. There stood  a  
tower of  marvellous shape.  It  was  fashioned by  the builders of old, who 
smoothed  the  Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed  a thing not  made by the 
craft  of Men, but riven from the bones of the  earth in the ancient torment 
of the hills. A peak and isle of rock  it was. black and gleaming hard: four 
mighty piers of many-sided stone were  welded  into one, but near the summit 
they  opened  into gaping  horns. their  pinnacles sharp  as the  points  of 
spears, keen-edged as  knives. Between  them was a narrow  space,  and there 
upon a floor of   polished stone,  written  with  strange signs,  a man might  
stand  five  hundred feet above the plain. This was Orthanc,  the citadel of 
Saruman, the  name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for  
in the Elvish  speech orthanc  signifies Mount Fang,  but in the language of 
the Mark of old the Cunning Mind. 
     A strong  place  and wonderful  was  Isengard,  and  long  it had  been 
beautiful;  and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of  Gondor upon the 
West, and wise men that watched the stars.  But Saruman had slowly shaped it 
to  his  shifting  purposes,  and made  it  better.  as  he  thought,  being 
deceived-for  all  those arts and  subtle devices, for which  he forsook his 
former  wisdom, and which fondly  he imagined  were his own. came  but  
from 
Mordor; so that what he made was naught, only a little copy, a child's model  
or a slave's  flattery, of that  vast fortress. armoury, prison,  furnace of 
great power, Barad-dyr, the Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed 
at  flattery, biding its  time, secure  in  its pride and  its  immeasurable 
strength. 
     This  was  the stronghold of  Saruman, as  fame reported it; for within 
living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates, save perhaps a few,  
such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and told no man what they saw.  
     Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it: and as 
he did so the Riders  saw to  their wonder that  the Hand appeared no longer  
white. It was stained as with dried blood; and looking closer they perceived 

####-that its  nails were red.  Unheeding  Gandalf rode  on  into  the mist,  and 
reluctantly  they followed him. All about them now,  as if  there had been a  
sudden flood.  wide pools of water lay beside the road, filling the hollows.  
and rills went trickling down among the stones.  
     At last Gandalf  halted  and beckoned to them; and they  came, and  saw 
that beyond him  the mists  had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone. The hour  
of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of Isengard. 
     But the  doors lay  hurled and twisted  on the ground.  And  all about, 
stone, cracked  and  splintered into  countless jagged shards, was scattered 
far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch  still stood, but it 
opened now upon a roofless chasm: the tunnel was laid bare.  and through the 
cliff-like walls  on  either side great  rents  and  breaches had been torn; 
their towers were beaten into  dust. If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and 
fallen on the hills with storm. it could ha ve worked no greater ruin. 
     The ring beyond was filled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in 
which  there heaved  and floated  a wreckage of beams and  spars, chests and 
casks and broken  gear. Twisted and leaning pillars reared their  splintered 
stems above the  flood. but all the roads were drowned. Far off, it  seemed, 
half veiled in  winding cloud, there loomed the  island rock. Still dark and 
tall, unbroken by the storm,  the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped  
about its feet. 
     The  king and all his company  sat silent on  their horses, marvelling, 
perceiving  that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they could not 
guess.  And  now they turned their eyes towards the archway  and  the ruined 
gates. There they  saw close  beside  them a great rubble-heap; and suddenly 
they were aware  of two small figures  lying on it at their ease, grey-clad, 
hardly  to  be seen  among  the  stones. There were  bottles and  bowls  and 
platters  laid beside them, as if  they had just eaten  well, and now rested 
from their labour. One seemed asleep; the other, with crossed legs  and arms 
behind his head,  leaned  back against a broken rock and sent from his mouth 
long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke. 
     For  a  moment Thjoden  and Jomer  and all  his men  stared at  them in 
wonder.  Amid all the  wreck  of Isengard  this seemed to them the strangest  
sight.  But  before the king could speak,  the  small smoke-breathing figure 
became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there silent  on the edge of  the 
mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man he looked, or like one, though  not  
much  more than half a man  in height; his head  of  brown curling hair  was 

####-uncovered,  but he was  clad in a  travel-stained cloak of the same  hue and 
shape a s the companions  of Gandalf had worn when  they rode  to Edoras.  He 
bowed very low. putting  his  hand upon  his breast.  Then,  seeming not  to 
observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Jomer and the king. 
     'Welcome, my lords,  to  Isengard!' he said. 'We  are  the doorwardens. 
Meriadoc,  son  of  Saradoc  is  my  name; and my  companion, who,  alas! is 
overcome with  weariness'  -- here he gave the other a dig with  his  foot -- 
'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North  is our 
home. The Lord Saruman  is within; but at the moment he is closeted with one 
Wormtongue,  or  doubtless  he  would be here  to  welcome  such  honourable 
guests.' 
     'Doubtless he would!' laughed Gandalf. 'And was it Saruman that ordered 
you to  guard his  damaged  doors, and watch for the arrival of guests, when 
your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?' 
     'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,' answered Merry gravely 'He  has 
been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who  has taken  over 
the 
management of Isengard. He  commanded me to  welcome  the Lord of Rohan 
with 
fitting words. I have done my best.' 
     'And  what about  your companions?  What about  Legolas  and me?' cried 
Gimli, unable to contain himself longer .  'You rascals, you woolly-footed and 
wool-pated truants!  A fine  hunt you  have  led  us! Two  hundred  leagues,  
through  fen and forest, battle  and death, to  rescue you! And here we find 
you feasting and  idling-and smoking!  Smoking! Where did  you  come  by the 
weed, you villains?  Hammer and  tongs!  I am so torn between  rage and joy, 
that if I do not burst. it will be a marvel!' 
     'You  speak  for  me, Gimli,' laughed Legolas.  'Though I would  sooner  
learn how they came by the wine.' 
     'One thing you  have  not found  in your hunting,  and that's  brighter 
wits,' said  Pippin, opening an eye. 'Here you find us sitting on a field of 
victory, amid  the plunder of armies, and  you wonder how we  came by  a few 
well-earned comforts!' 
     'Well-earned?' said Gimli. 'I cannot believe that!' 
     The  Riders laughed. 'It cannot be doubted  that we witness the meeting 
of dear friends,' said Thjoden. 'So these are the lost ones of your company, 
Gandalf? The days are fated  to  be filled with marvels.  Already I have seen  

####-many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of 
the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the 
Holbytlan?' 
     'Hobbits, if you please, lord,' said Pippin. 
     'Hobbits?'  said Thjoden. 'Your  tongue is  strangely changed; but  the 
name sounds  not  unfitting so.  Hobbits! No report that I have  heard  does 
justice to the truth.' 
     Merry  bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. 'You are gracious, lord; 
or I hope  that I may so take your words,'  he said.  'And  here is  another  
marvel! I have wandered in  many lands, since I left my home, and never till 
now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.' 
     'My people came out of the North long  ago,' said  Thjoden. 'But I will 
not deceive  you: we know no tales  about hobbits. All that is said among us 
is that far away, over many hills and  rivers, live  the halfling folk  that 
dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their  deeds.  for 
it  is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of  men, being able  to 
vanish in  a  twinkling: and they  can change their voices  to  resemble the 
piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.' 
     'It could indeed, lord,' said Merry. 
     'For one thing,' said Thjoden, 'I had not heard that they spouted smoke 
from their mouths.' 
     'That is not surprising,'  answered Merry; 'for  it is an art which  we 
have  not  practised  for  more  than  a  few  generations.  It  was  Tobold 
Hornblower,  of Longbottom  in the Southfarthing,  who  first grew  the true 
pipe-weed  in his gardens, about  the year  1070 according to our reckoning.  
How old Toby came by the plant...' 
     'You do  not  know your  danger,  Thjoden,' interrupted Gandalf. 'These 
hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table, 
or the small doings of  their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers,  
and  remoter cousins to the ninth degree,  if  you encourage them with undue 
patience. Some  other time wou ld be more fitting for the history of smoking. 
Where is Treebeard, Merry?' 
     'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to  get  a  drink-of  clean 
water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work -- over  
there.' Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake; and as  they looked, 
they heard a  distant rumbling and rattling, as if an avalanche was  falling 
from  the  mountain-side.  Far  away  came a  hoom-hom, as of  horns blowing 

####-triumphantly. 
     'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?' asked Gandalf.  
     'There is  the water,' said Merry. 'But Quickbeam and  some  others are 
watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain  are of  Saruman's 
planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.' 
     'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,' said Legolas, 'but his arms are at his 
sides, and he stands as still as a door -tree.' 
     'It is  past  noon,'  said Gandalf, 'and we at any  rate have not eaten 
since early morning. Yet I wish  to  see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he  
leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?' 
     'He left a message,' said  Merry, 'and  I was coming to  it, but I have 
been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the 
Mark and Gandalf  will ride  to  the northern wall  they will find Treebeard 
there,  and he will welcome them. I may add that they will also find food of 
the best there, it  was discovered and selected by your humble servants.' He 
bowed. 
     Gandalf laughed. 'That is  better!' he  said. 'Well,  Thjoden. will you  
ride with me  to find Treebeard?  We must go round about, but it is not far. 
When you see Treebeard,  you will learn much. For  Treebeard is Fangorn, and 
the eldest and chief of the  Ents, and when you speak with him you will hear  
the speech of the oldest of all living things.' 
     'I  will come with you,' said  Thjoden. 'Farewell, my hobbits!  May  we 
meet again in my house! There  you shall sit beside me and tell  me all that 
your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires,  as far as  you can reckon 
them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!' 
     The hobbits bowed low. 'So that  is the King of Rohan!'  said Pippin in 
an undertone.  'A fine old fellow. Very polite.' 

####- 

Chapter 9. Flotsam and Jetsam 

 
 
     Gandalf and the King's  company rode away, turning eastward to make the 
circuit of the ruined  walls of Isengard.  But  Aragorn, Gimli,  and Legolas 
remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to  stray in search of grass, they 
came and sat beside the hobbits. 
     'Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where none of 
us ever thought to come,' said Aragorn. 
     'And now  that the  great ones have gone to discuss high matters,' said 
Legolas,  'the hunters  can  per haps learn the  answers  to  their own small 
riddles. We tracked you  as  far  as  the forest, but there  are  still many 
things that I should like to know the truth of.' 
     'And there is a great deal, too, that we want to  know about you ' said 
Merry.  'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that 
is not nearly enough.' 
     'All  in good time,' said Legolas. 'We were the hunters, and you should 
give an account of yourselves to us first.' 
     'Or  second,' said Gimli. 'It would  go better after a meal. t  have  a  
sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make  amends by finding 
us some of the plunder that you spoke  of. Food and drink would pay off some 
of my score against you.' 
     'Then you shall  have  it,' said Pippin.  'Will you have it here, or in 
more  comfort in what's left of Saruman's guard-house--over  there under the 
arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.' 
     'Less than an eye!' said Gimli. 'But  I will not go into  any orc-house 
nor touch Orcs' meat or anything that they have mauled.' 
     'We wouldn't  ask  you  to,' said Merry. 'We have had  enough  of  Orcs 
ourselves to last a life-time. But there  were  many other folk in Isengard. 
Saruman  kept enough wisdom not  to  trust his Orcs. He had Men to guard his 
gates:  some of his  most faithful  servants,  I  suppose. Anyway  they were 
favoured and got good provisions.' 
     'And pipe-weed?' asked Gimli. 
     'No,  I  don't  think  so,' Merry laughed. 'But that  is another story, 
which can wait until after lunch.' 
     'Well let us go and have lunch then!' said the Dwarf. 

####-     The hobbits led the way; and they  passed under the arch  and came to a  
wide  door upon the  left, at  the  top of a stair. It opened  direct into a  
large chamber,  with other smaller  doors  at the far end,  and a hearth and 
chimney at one side. The chamber was hewn out of the stone; and it must once 
have  been dark, for its windows looked out only into the  tunnel. But light 
came in now through the broken roof. On the hearth wood was burning. 
     'I  lit a  bit of fire,' said Pippin. 'It cheered us up  in  the  fogs.  
There were few faggots about, and  most of the  wood we could find was  wet. 
But  there  is  a great draught in  the  chimney:  it seems  to wind away up 
through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked. A fire  is handy. 
I  will  make you some toast. The bread is  three  or four days  old,  I  am 
afraid.' 
     Aragorn and his  companions sat  themselves down at  one  end of a long 
table,  and  the  hobbits  disappeared  through  one  of  the  inner  doors. 
'Store-room  in there,  and above  the woods, luckily,' said Pippin, as they 
came back laden with dishes, bowls, cups, knives, and food of various sorts.  
     'And  you need not  turn up your nose at the provender,  Master Gimli,' 
said Merry. 'This is  not orc-stuff, but  man-food, as  Treebeard calls  it. 
Will you have wine or beer? There's a barrel  inside there -- very passable. 
And this is first-rate salted pork. Or  I can cut you  some rashers of bacon 
and  broil them,  if you like.  I am  sorry there  is no  green  stuff:  the 
deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days! I cannot offer  
you  anything  to follow  but butter and  honey  for  your  bread.  Are  you  
content?' 
     'Indeed yes,' said Gimli. 'The score is much reduced.' 
     The  three  were  soon  busy  with  their meal;  and the  two  hobbits, 
unabashed,  set  to  a second time. 'We  must keep our guests company,' they  
said. 
     'You  are full of courtesy this  morning,' laughed Legolas.  'But maybe. 
if  we  had  not arrived, you  would already have been keeping  one  another  
company again.' 
     'Maybe; and why not?' said Pippin. 'We had foul fare with the Orcs, and 
little enough for days before that. It seems a long while since we could eat 
to heart's content.' 
     'It does not seem to have done you any harm,' said Aragorn. 'Indeed you  
look in the bloom of health.' 
     'Aye, you do indeed,' said Gimli, looking them up and down over the top  

####-of his cup. 'Why,  your hair is twice as thick and curly  as when we parted; 
and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for 
hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.' 
     'He has not,' said Merry. 'But Ents on ly drink, and drink is not enough 
for content. Treebeard's draughts may be nourishing,  but one feels the need 
of something solid. And even lembas is none the worse for a change.' 
     'You have drunk of  the waters of the  Ents, have  you?'  said Legolas.  
'Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli's eyes do not deceive him. Strange 
songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.' 
     'Many strange tales  have been told about that land,' said Aragorn.  'I  
have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about the Ents!' 
     'Ents,'  said Pippin,  'Ents are -- well  Ents are all different for on 
thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd.' He tried a few fumbling 
words that trailed  off into silence. 'Oh, well,' he went on, 'you have seen 
some at a distance, already -they saw you  at any rate, and reported that you  
were on  the way-and you  will see many others,  I  expect, before you leave 
here. You must form your own ideas.' 
     'Now,  now!' said Gimli. 'We are beginning the story  in the middle.  I 
should like a tale in the  right order,  starting with that strange day when 
our fellowship was broken.' 
     'You  shall have it, if there  is time,'  said Merry. 'But first -if you  
have finished eating-you shall fill  your pipes and light up. And  then for a  
little while we can pretend that we are all back safe  at Bree again,  or in 
Rivendell.' 
     He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. 'We have heaps of it,' 
he said; 'and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we go. We  did some 
salvage-work  this morning, Pippin and I. There are lots of things  floating 
about. It  was Pippin who found two  small barrels,  washed up  out of  some  
cellar  or  store-house, I suppose. When we opened them, we found they  were 
filled with this:  as fine  a  pipe-weed  as  you could  wish  for, and quite 
unspoilt.' 
     Gimli  took some  and rubbed it in his  palms and sniffed it. 'It feels 
good, and it smells good,' he said. 
     'It is good!' said  Merry. 'My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf! There 
were  the  Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as  plain as plain.  How it  
came here, I can't imagine. For Saruman's private use. I fancy. I never knew 
that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?' 

####-     'It  would,' said Gimli, 'if I had a pipe to go  with it. Alas, I  lost 
mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?' 
     'No, I am  afraid  not,' said Merry. 'We have  not found any, not  even 
here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself. it seems. And I  
don't think it would be any use knocking on the doors of  Orthanc  to beg  a  
pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes. as good friends must at a pinch.' 
     'Half a moment!' said Pippin. Putting his hand inside the breast of his 
jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. 'I keep a treasure or  
two near my  skin, as precious as  Rings  to  me.  Here's one: my old wooden 
pipe.  And  here's another: an unused one. I have carried  it  a  long way,, 
though  I don't know why.  I never really expected to find  any pipe-weed on 
the journey, when my own ran  out. But now it comes in useful after all.' He 
held  up a small  pipe with a wide  flattened bowl, and handed it to  Gimli. 
'Does that settle the score between  us?' he said. 'Settle it!' cried Gimli. 
'Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in your debt.' 
     'Well, I am going back into the  open air, to see what the wind and sky 
are doing!' said Legolas.  
     'We will come with you,' said Aragorn. 
     They went  out and seated themselves  upon the piled stones before  the 
gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists were lifting  
and floating away upon the breeze. 
     'Now let  us take our ease  here for a little!' said Aragorn.  'We will 
sit  on the  edge  of  ruin and talk,  as Gandalf  says,  while  he  is busy 
elsewhere. I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before.' He wrapped  
his grey cloak about him, hiding  his mail-shirt, and stretched out his long 
legs. Then he lay back and sent from his lips a thin stream of smoke. 
     'Look!' said Pippin. 'Strider the Ranger has come back!' 
     'He has never been away,' said Aragorn.  'I am Strider and D®nadan too,  
and I belong both to Gondor and the North.' 
     They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them; slanting 
into the valley from among white clouds high in the West. Legolas lay still, 
looking  up at  the  sun and  sky with steady eyes,  and singing  softly  to 
himself.  At last he sat  up. 'Come  now!' he said. 'Time  wears on, and the 
mists  are  blowing away, or  would  if  you  strange folk did  not  wreathe 
yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?' 
     'Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all 
strung-up in an orc-camp,' said Pippin. 'Let me see, what is today?' 

####-     'The fifth of March  in the Shire-reckoning,' said Aragorn. Pippin made 
some calculations on his fingers. 'Only nine days ago!' he  said.1 'It seems 
a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was like a bad dream, I 
reckon that three  very horrible days  followed. Merry will correct me, if I 
forget anything important: I am not going into details:  the  whips and  the 
filth  and stench  and all that; it does not bear remembering.' With that he 
plunged  into an account of Boromir's last fight and the orc-march from Emyn 
Muil to the Forest.  The others  nodded as the various points were fitted in 
with their guesses.  
     'Here are some treasures that you let fall,' said Aragorn. 'You will be 
glad to have them back.' He loosened his belt from under his cloak  and took  
from it the two sheathed knives.  
     'Well!' said  Merry. 'I  never expected  to see those again! I marked a  
few orcs with mine; but Ugl®k  took them from us. How he glared! At first  I 
thought he  was going to  stab me, but he threw the  things away as if  they 
burned him.' 
     'And here also is  your brooch, Pippin,' said Aragorn. 'I have kept  it 
safe, for it is a very precious thing.' 
     'I know,'  said Pippin.  'It was a  wrench  to let it go; but what else 
could I do?' 
     'Nothing else,' answered Aragorn. 'One who cannot cast away  a treasure 
at need is in fetters. You did rightly.' 
     'The cutting of the bands on your wrists,  that was smart  work!'  said 
Gimli. 'Luck  served you there; but you seized your chance with both  hands, 
one might say. ' 
     'And set us a  pretty  riddle,' said  Legolas. 'I  wondered  if you had 
grown wings!' 
     'Unfortunately  not,'  said  Pippin.  'But  you  did   not  know  about 
Grishnbkh.' He shuddered and said  no more, leaving  Merry to tell of  those  
last horrible moments: the  pawing hands, the hot  breath, and  the dreadful 
strength of Grishnbkh's hairy arms.  
     'All this about the  Orcs of Barad-dyr, Lugb®rz as  they call it, makes 
me uneasy,' said  Aragorn.  'The  Dark Lord  already knew  too much and  his 
servants also; and Grishnbkh  evidently sent some message  across  the River 
after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard. But Saruman 
at any rate is in a cleft stick of his own cutting.' 
     'Yes, whichever side  wins, his outlook is poor,'  said  Merry. 'Things 

####-began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in Rohan.' 
     'We caught  a glimpse  of  the old villain, or so Gandalf  hints,' said 
Gimli. 'On the edge of the Forest.' 
     'When was that?' asked Pippin. 
     'Five nights ago,' said Aragorn. 
     'Let me see,' said Merry: 'five nights ago-now we come to a part of the 
story  you  know nothing  about.  We met  Treebeard that morning  after  the  
battle; and that night we were  at Wellinghall,  one of his ent-houses.  The 
next  morning  we  went to  Entmoot, a gathering of Ents, that is,  and  the 
queerest thing  I have ever seen in my life. It lasted all that  day and the 
next; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam. And then late in 
the afternoon in the third day of their moot,  the Ents suddenly blew up. It 
was amazing. The Forest had  felt as tense as if a  thunderstorm was brewing 
inside it: then  all at once  it exploded. I wish you could have heard their 
song as they marched.' 
     'If Saruma n had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by now, even 
if he had had to run on his own legs,' said Pippin. 
     'Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, 
     We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door! 
     There was  very much more. A  great deal  of the song had no words, and  
was like a music of horns and drums.  It was very exciting. But I thought it 
was only marching music and no more, just a song  -- until I got here. I know 
better now.' 
     'We came down  over  the last  ridge  into Nan Curunnr, after night had 
fallen,' Merry continued. 'It was then that I first had the feeling that the 
Forest itself  was  moving  behind  us. I thought  I was dreaming  an entish 
dream, but  Pippin had noticed  it too. We were both frightened; but  we did  
not find out more about it until later. 
     'It  was  the  Huorns,  or so the Ents call them  in "short  language". 
Treebeard  won't say much about them,  but  I think they are Ents that  have 
become almost  like trees, at least to look at. They stand here and there in 
the wood or under its eaves, silent, watching endlessly over the trees;  but 
deep  in the  darkest  dales there  are hundreds and  hundreds  of  them,  I 
believe. 
     'There is a great power in  them, and they seem able to wrap themselves 
in shadow: it  is difficult to see  them moving. But  they do. They can move 
very quickly, if  they are angry.  You  stand still  looking at the weather, 

####-maybe, or listening to the rustling of  the wind, and then  suddenly you find 
that  you  are in the middle of a wood with great  groping trees  all around 
you. They still have voices, and can speak with the Ents  -- that is why they 
are called Huorns, Treebeard says  -- but they  have  become queer and  wild.  
Danger ous. I should be terrified of meeting them, if there were no true Ents 
about to look after them. 
     'Well, in the early night  we crept  down a  long ravine into the upper  
end of the Wizard's Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns behind. We 
could  not see them, of course,  but the whole air  was full of creaking. It 
was very dark, a  cloudy  night. They moved at a great speed as soon as they 
had left  the hills,  and made a noise like a rushing wind. The Moon did not 
appear through the clouds, and  not long after midnight there was a tall wood 
all round  the north side of Isengard. There was  no  sign of enemies nor of 
any  challenge. There was a light gleaming from  a high window in the tower, 
that was all. 
     'Treebeard and a few more Ents crept  on, right round to within sight of 
the great gates. Pippin  and I were with him. We were sitting on Treebeard's 
shoulders, and  I could feel the quivering tenseness  in  him. But even when 
they are roused, Ents can be very cautious and patient. They stood  still  as 
carved stones, breathing and listening. 
     'Then all at once there was  a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the 
walls of Isengard  echoed. We thought that we had  been discovered, and that 
battle was  going to  begin. But nothing of  the sort.  All Saruman's people 
were marching away. I  don't know much about this war, or about the 
Horsemen 
of Rohan, but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all his 
men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I  saw  the  enemy go: endless 
lines  of marching Orcs; and troops  of  them mounted on  great wolves.  And 
there were battalions of Men, too. Many  of them carried torches, and in the 
flare I could see  their faces. Most of them were ordinary men,  rather tall 
and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly  evil -looking. But there were 
some  others that were  horrible: man-high, but  with goblin-faces,  sallow,  
leering,  squint-eyed.  Do  you  know,  they  reminded  me at  once of  that 
Southerner at Bree: only he was not  so obviously orc-like as  most of these 
were.' 
     'I  thought of him too,' said Aragorn.  'We had many of these half-orcs 
to deal with at Helm's  Deep. It seems plain  now that that Southerner was a  

####-spy of Saruman's; but whether he was working  with the Black Riders,  or for 
Saruman alone, I do not know.  It is difficult with these  evil folk to know 
when they are in league, and when they are cheating one another.' 
     'Well, of all sorts together, there must have  been ten thousand at the 
very least,' said Merry.  'They took an hour to  pass out of the gates. Some 
went off down the highway  to the  Fords, and some turned  away µ  and  went 
eastward. A bridge has  been built down there, about  a mile away, where the 
river  runs in a very deep channel. You could see i t  now, if  you stood up. 
They were all singing with harsh voices, and laughing, making a hideous din. 
I thought things looked very black for Rohan. But Treebeard did not move. He 
said: 'My business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.' 
     'But, though I could not see what was happening  in the dark, I believe 
that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were shut again. Their 
business  was with Orcs I think.  They  were  far  down  the valley  in  the 
morning; or any rate there was a shadow there that one couldn't see through.  
     'As soon as Saruman had sent off all his army, our turn came. Treebeard 
put us down, and went up to the gates, and began hammering on the doors, and 
calling for Saruman. There was no answer, except arrows  and stones from the 
walls. But arrows are no  use against Ents. They hurt  them, of  course, and 
infuriate them:  like stinging flies. But an  Ent  can  be  stuck as full of 
orc-arrows  as  a pin -cushion,  and take no serious  harm.  They  cannot  be 
poisoned,  for one thing; and their skin seems to be very thick, and tougher  
than bark.  It takes a  very  heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They 
don't like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe -men to one Ent: 
a man  that hacks once at  an  Ent  never  gets a chance of a second blow. A 
punch from an Ent-fist crumples up iron like thin tin. 
     'When Treebeard had got a few  arrows  in  him, he began to warm up, to  
get positively "hasty", as he would say. He let  out a great hoom-hom, and a  
dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent is terrifying. Their fingers,  
and  their toes,  just  freeze  on  to  rock;  and  they  tear  it  up  like 
bread-crust. It was like watching the work of  great tree-roots in a hundred 
years, all packed into a few moments. 
     'They pushed,  pulled,  tore,  shook,  and  hammered;  and  clang-bang, 
crash-crack,  in five minutes they had these huge gates just lying in  ruin; 
and  some were  already beginning to eat into  the walls,  like rabbits in a  
sand-pit. I don't know what Saruman thought was happening; but anyway he 
did 

####-not know how to deal with it. His wizardry may have been falling off lately,  
of course;  but anyway  I think he has not much grit, not much plain courage 
alone in a tight place without a lot of  slaves and machines  and things, if 
you  know what I mean. Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame 
was not all along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.' 
     'No,'  said  Aragorn. 'Once he was as  great as his fame made h im.  His 
knowledge  was deep,  his thought  was  subtle,  and his hands  marvellously  
skilled; and  he  had  a power  over the  minds of others. The wise he could 
persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That power he certainly still 
keeps. There are not  many in Middle-earth that I  should  say were safe, if 
they were  left  alone to talk with him,  even now  when he  has suffered  a  
defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has 
been laid bare, but very few others.' 
     'The Ents are safe,' said Pippin. 'He seems  at one  time to  have  got 
round them, but never again. And anyway  he did  not understand them; and he 
made  the great mistake of  leaving them out of his  calculations. He had no 
plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work. 
As  soon  as  our  attack began,  the few remaining rats in Isengard started 
bolting through  every  hole that the Ents  made.  The Ents  let the Men go, 
after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down  at this end. I 
don't think many orc-folk, of any size, escaped. Not  from the Huorns: there 
was a wood  full of them all round Isengard by  that time, as well as  those 
that had gone down the valley. 
     'When  the  Ents  had reduced a large part  of  the  southern walls  to 
rubbish,  and  what was  left of his people  had  bolted  and  deserted him, 
Saruman fled in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates when we arrived: 
I expect he came  to watch his splendid army march out. When the  Ents broke 
their  way in,  he  left in a hurry. They did not spot him at first. But the 
night had opened out, and there was a great light of stars, quite enough for  
Ents to see by,  and suddenly  Quickbeam  gave a  cry  "The tree-killer, the 
tree-killer!"  Quickbeam is a gentle creature, but he  hates Saruman all the 
more fiercely for that: his people suffered cruelly from orc-axes. He  leapt 
down the path from the inner gate, and he  can  move like a wind when  he is 
roused. There was a pale figure hurrying away  in and out of the  shadows of 
the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs  to the tower -door. But it 
was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after  him, that he was within a step 
or two of being caught and strangled when he slipped in through the door. 

####-     'When Saruman  was  safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before he set 
some of  his precious machinery to work. By  that time there were  many Ents 
inside  Isengard: some  had followed Quickbeam, and others had burst in from 
the  north  and  east ; they were roaming  about and  doing a great  deal  of 
damage. Suddenly up came fires and foul fumes: the vents and shafts all over 
the  plain began to spout  and belch. Several of the Ents  got scorched  and 
blistered.  One of them,  Beechbone  I  think he was  called,  a  very  tall 
handsome Ent,  got caught in a spray of some  liquid fire and burned like  a  
torch: a horrible sight. 
     'That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused before; 
but  I  was wrong. I saw  what it was like at last.  It was staggering. They 
roared and boomed and trumpeted, until stones began to crack and fall at the  
mere noise of them. Merry  and  I lay on  the  ground and stuffed our cloaks 
into our ears. Round  and  round the  rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding 
and  storming like a howling gale, breaking pillars,  hurling avalanches  of 
boulders  down the shafts, tossing up huge slabs of stone into the air  like 
leaves.  The tower was in the  middle  of a spinning  whirlwind. I  saw iron 
posts  and blocks of  masonry go rocketing  up hundreds  of feet, and  smash 
against the windows  of Orthanc. But Treebeard kept his head. He had not had 
any burns, luckily. He  did not want  his  folk to hurt themselves in  their 
fury,  and  he  did  not  want  Saruman to  escape out of some hole  in  the  
confusion.   Many  of  the   Ents   were   hurling  themselves  against  the 
Orthanc-rock;  but that defeated  them.  It  is very  smooth  and hard. Some 
wizardry is in it, perhaps, older and stronger than  Saruman's.  Anyway they 
could  not get a grip on it, or make a crack in  it; and they  were bruising 
and wounding themselves against it. 'So Treebeard went out into the ring and 
shouted.  His  enormous voice  rose above  all the din.  There  was  a  dead 
silence, suddenly. In it we  heard a shrill  laugh from a high window in the 
tower.  That had a queer effect on the Ents. They had been boiling over; now 
they became cold, grim as  ice, and quiet.  They left the plain and gathered 
round Treebeard,  standing quite still.  He  spoke  to  them for a little in 
their own language; I think he was telling them of a plan he had made in his 
old head long before. Then they just faded silently away in  the grey light. 
Day was dawning by that time. 
     'They set a  watch on the tower,   I believe,  but  the watchers were so 
well hidden in  shadows  and kept so  still, that  I could not see them. The 
others went away north. All  that day they were busy, out of  sight. Most of 

####-the time  we were left  alone. It  was a dreary day; and we wandered about a  
bit, though we kept out of the view of the windows of Orthanc, as much as we 
could: they stared at us so threateningly. A good deal of the time  we spent 
looking for something to eat. And also we sat and talked, wondering what was 
happening away south in Rohan,  and what had  become of all the rest  of our 
Company. Every  now  and  then we could hear in the distance the rattle  and 
fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills.  
     'In the afternoon we walked round the circle,  and  went  to have a look  
at what was going on. There was  a great shadowy  wood of Huorns at the head 
of the  valley, and  another round the northern wall. We  did not dare to go 
in. But there was a rending, tearing noise of work going on inside. Ents and 
Huorns were  digging great  pits  and  trenches, and making  great pools and 
dams, gathering all the waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream 
that they could find. We left them to it. 
     'At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming a nd booming to 
himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched  his great arms and legs 
and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired. 
     ' "Tired?" he said, "tired? Well  no, not tired, but stiff.  I  need  a  
good  draught  of  Entwash.  We  have   worked  hard;   we  have  done  more 
stone-cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many a long 
year 
before. But it is nearly finished. When night falls do not  linger near this 
gate or in the  old tunnel! Water may come through-and it will be  foul water  
for a while, until all the filth  of Saruman  is washed away. Then  Isen can 
run clean  again." He began  to pull  down  a bit  more of  the walls,  in a  
leisurely sort of way, just to amuse himself. 
     'We were just  wondering where  it  wou ld  be  safe to lie and get some 
sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There was the sound of a  
rider coming swiftly  up the road. Merry  and I lay quiet, and Treebeard hid 
himself in the shadows under the arch. Suddenly  a great horse came striding 
up, like a flash of silver. It was already dark. but I could see the rider's 
face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat 
up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn't. 
     'There  was no  need.  He  halted  just by  us and looked down  at  us. 
'Gandalf!' I said  at last.  but my voice  was only  a whisper. Did he  say: 
"Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!"? No, indeed! He said: "Get up, 
you tom-fool  of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in  all  this ruin is 

####-Treebeard? I want him. Quick!" 
     'Treebeard heard his voice  and  came out of the shadows  at once;  and 
there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of them seemed 
surprised at all.  Gandalf obviously  expected to find  Treebeard  here; and 
Treebeard  might almost have been loitering about near the  gates on purpose 
to  meet  him. Yet we  had  told  the old  Ent all  about  Moria. But then I 
remembered a queer look he gave us  at the time. I can only suppose that  he 
had  seen Gandalf or  had some  news of him, but would not say anything in a 
hurry. "Don't  be hasty" is  his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say 
much about Gandalf's movements when he is not there. 
     '"Hoom! Gandalf!" said Treebeard.  "I  am  glad  you have come. Wood and 
water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard to manage here." 
     '"Treebeard," said Gandalf. "I need your help. You have done much,  but 
I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage." 
     'Then those two went off and had a council  together in some corner. It 
must have seemed very  hasty  to  Treebeard, for Gandalf was in a tremendous 
hurry, and was already talking  at a great  pace,  before they passed out of 
hearing.  They were only away a matter of minutes, perhaps  a quarter  of an 
hour. Then Gandalf came back to us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He 
did say he was glad to see us, then. 
     '"But Gandalf," I cried, "where have you  been?  And have you seen  the 
others?" 
     '"Wherever  I have been, I am back,"  he answered in the genuine Gandalf 
manner. "Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news must wait.  This is a  
perilous night,  and I  must ride fast. But the dawn may be brighter; and if 
so, we shall  meet  again.  Take  care  of  yourselves,  and keep away  from 
Orthanc! Good-bye!" 
     'Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had evidently 
learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He looked at us and said: 
"Hm, well, I find you are not such  hasty  folk as I thought. You  said much 
less than you might, and  not more than you should. Hm, this is  a bundle of 
news and no mistake! Well, now Treebeard must get busy again." 
     'Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it  did not cheer  
us  up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you three than about 
Frodo and Sam, or about poor Boromir. For we gathered that there was a great 
battle going on, or soon would be, and that  you were in it, and might never  
come out of it. 

####-     '"Huorns will help,"  said Treebeard. Then he went  away and we did not  
see him again until this morning. 
     'It was deep night. We lay  on  top of a pile  of stone,  and could see 
nothing beyond  it.  Mist  or shadows  blotted out  everything like  a great 
blanket  all  round us. The air seemed hot and  heavy; and it  was  full  of 
rustlings,  creakings,  and  a  murmur  like voices  passing. I  think  that 
hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in the battle. 
Later  there was  a  great  rumble  of  thunder away south, and  flashes  of 
lightning   far  away  across  Rohan.  Every  now  and  then  we  could  see 
mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab  out suddenly,  black  and white, 
and then vanish. And behind us there were  noises like thunder in hills, but 
different. At times the whole valley echoed. 
     'It  must have been  about midnight when  the Ents broke  the  dams and 
poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wall, down into 
Isengard. The  Huorn-dark had passed,  and the  thunder had rolled away. The 
Moon was sinking behind the western mountains.  
     'Isengard began to fill up with black  creeping streams and pools. They 
glittered  in the  last  light of the Moon,  as  they spread over the plain. 
Every now and  then the waters  found their  way down  into  some  shaft  or  
spouthole. Great  white steams hissed up. Smoke rose in billows.  There were 
explosions and gusts  of fire. One great  coil of  vapour  went whirling up, 
twisting round and round Orthanc, until it looked like a tall peak of cloud, 
fiery underneath and moonlit above. And still more water poured in, until at 
last Isengard looked like a huge flat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.' 
     'We saw  a cloud of smoke and steam from  the  south last night when we 
came to the mouth of Nan Curunnr,' said Aragorn. 'We feared that Saruman 
was 
brewing some new devilry for us.' 
     'Not he!' said Pippin. 'He was probably  choking and  not laughing  any 
more. By  the morning, yesterday morning, the water  had sunk down  into all 
the holes,  and there was a dense fog. We took refuge in that guardroom over 
there; and we had  rather a fright. The lake began  to overflow and pour out 
through the old  tunnel,  and the  water was rapidly rising up the steps. We 
thought we were  going to get caught  like  Orcs in a  hole; but we  found a  
winding stair at the back of  the  store-room that brought  us out on top of 
the arch. It was a squeeze to get  out, as the passages had been cracked and 
half blocked with fallen stone  near the top. There  we sat high up above the 

####-floods  and watched the drowning of Isengard. The  Ents kept  on pouring  in 
more water, till all the fires were quenched and every cave filled. The fogs 
slowly gathered together  and steamed up into  a huge umbrella of  cloud: it 
must have been  a mile high. In the evening there  was a great rainbow  over  
the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted out by a thick drizzle on 
the mountain-sides. It  all went very quiet. A few wolves howled mournfully, 
far away. The Ents stopped the  inflow in the  night, and sent the Isen back  
into its old course. And that was the end of it all. 
     'Since then  the water has  been sinking  again. There  must be outlets 
somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps out of any of 
his  windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We  felt very lonely. Not  
even  a visible Ent  to talk to in all the ruin;  and no  news. We spent the 
night up on top there above the arch,  and it was cold and  damp and we  did 
not sleep.  We  had a feeling  that anything  might  happen  at  any minute. 
Saruman  is  still in his tower. There was a noise in the  night like a wind 
coming  up the valley. I think the Ents  and Huorns that had been away  came 
back  then; but where they have all gone to  now, I  don't  know. It  was  a  
misty,  moisty morning  when we  climbed down  and  looked  round again, 
and 
nobody was about. And that is  about all there  is  to tell. It seems almost 
peaceful  now after all  the turmoil. And safer too, somehow,  since Gandalf 
came back. I could sleep!' 
     They  all fell silent  for a while. Gimli re-filled his pipe. 'There is 
one thing I wonder about,' he  said as he lit it with his  flint and tinder: 
'Wormtongue. You told Thjoden he was with Saruman. How did he get there?' 
     'Oh yes,  I forgot about him,'  said Pippin. 'He did not get here  till 
this morning. We had just lit the fire and had some breakfast when Treebeard 
appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our names outside. 
     '"I have just come round to see how  you are faring, my lads,' he said; 
'and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All's well; aye very well 
indeed!" he laughed, and slapped his  thighs. "No more Orcs  in Isengard, no 
more axes! And there will be folk  coming up from the South before the day is 
old; some that you may be glad to see." 
     'He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on the road. 
We rushed out  before the gates, and  I stood and stared,  half expecting to 
see Strider  and Gandalf come riding up at the head of  an army. But  out of 
the  mist there  rode a man on  an old tired  horse; and he  looked  a queer  

####-twisted sort of creature  himself. There was no one  else. When he came. out 
of the  mist and suddenly saw  all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he 
sat and gaped, and his face went almost green. He was so bewildered that  he 
did not seem to notice us at first. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to 
turn his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides,  put out 
a long  arm, and  lifted him out  of the saddle. His horse bolted in terror, 
and he grovelled  on the ground. He said he was Grnma, friend and counsellor  
of  the  king,  and had  been sent  with important messages  from Thjoden to 
Saruman. 
     '"No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full of foul 
Orcs," he said,  "so I was sent. And I have had a perilous journey, and I am 
hungry and weary. I fled far north out of my way, pursued by wolves." 
     'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself 
"liar".  Treebeard looked at him in  his long slow  way for several minutes, 
till the wretched man was squirming on the floor. Then at last he said: "Ha, 
hm, I was expecting  you, Master Wormtongue." The man  started a t that name. 
"Gandalf got  here first. So I know as much about you  as I need, and I know 
what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. 
I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you 
can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of." 
     '"Let me go, let me go!" said Wormtongue. "I know the way." 
     '"You knew the way, I  don't doubt,"  said Treebeard. "But  things have 
changed here a little. Go and see!" 
     'He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch with us close  
behind, until he came inside  the ring and could see all the floods that lay 
between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us. 
     '"Let me go away!" he whined. "Let  me go away! My messages are useless 
now." 
     '"They are indeed," said Treebeard. "But you have only two  choices: to 
stay  with me until  Gandalf and your master arrive; or to  cross the water. 
Which will you have?" 
     'The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot into the 
water; but he drew back. "I cannot swim," he said. 
     '"The  water is not deep," said Treebeard. "It is dirty,  but that will 
not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!" 
     'With that the wretch  floundered off into the flood. It rose up nearly 
to his neck before  he got too far away for me to see him. The last I saw of 

####-him was clinging to some old barrel or  piece of  wood. But  Treebeard waded 
after him, and watched his progress.  
     '"Well, he has gone in," he said when he returned. "I saw  him crawling 
up  the steps like a draggled  rat. There is someone  in  the tower still: a  
hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and I  hope  the welcome is 
to  his liking. Now  I  must go and wash myself clean  of the slime. I'll be 
away  up on the north side,  if anyone wants to see  me. There  is no  clean 
water down here  fit for an  Ent to drink. or to bathe in. So I will ask you  
two lads to keep a watch at  the gate for the folk that are coming. There'll 
be the Lord of the Fields of Rohan, mark you! You must welcome  him as  well 
as you know how: his men have fought a great fight with the Orcs. Maybe, you  
know the right fashion  of Men's words  for such a  lord,  better than Ents.  
There have been many  lords in the green fields in my time, and I have never 
learned their speech or their  names. They will be wanting man-food, and you 
know all  about that, I guess.  So find what you think  is fit for a king to 
eat,  if you can." And that is the end of the story. Though I should like to 
know who this Wormtongue is. Was he really the king's counsellor?' 
     'He was,' said  Aragorn; 'and also  Saruman's spy and servant in Rohan. 
Fate has not been  kinder to him than he deserves. The sight of the  ruin of 
all  that  he  thought  so  strong and  magnificent  must  have  been almost 
punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits him.' 
     'Yes, I  don't suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of  kindness,' 
said Merry.  'He seemed rather grimly delighted  with the business  and  was 
laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe and drink. We spent a busy 
time after that, searching the flotsam, and rummaging about. We found two or  
three  store-rooms  in different  places nearby,  above the flood-level. But 
Treebeard  sent  some  Ents down, and they  carried off  a great deal of the 
stuff. 
     '"We want man-food for twenty-five," the Ents said, so you can see that 
somebody  had  counted your  company carefully before you arrived. You three 
were  evidently meant to go  with the  great people. But you  would  not have  
fared any better. We kept as good as we sent, I promise you. Better, because 
we sent no drink. 
     '"What about drink?" I said to the Ents.  
     '"There is water of Isen," they said, "and that is good enough for Ents 
and Men." But I hope that the Ents may have found time to brew some of their 
draughts from the mountain-springs, and we shall see Gandalf's beard curling 

####-when he returns. After the Ents had gone, we felt tired,  and hungry. But we 
did not grumble  -- our labours  had  been well rewarded. It was through our  
search  for  man-food that Pippin  discovered the prize of  all the flotsam, 
those  Hornblower  barrels.  "Pipe-weed  is better after food," said Pippin; 
that is how the situation arose.' 
     'We understand it all perfectly now,' said Gimli. 
     'All except one thing,' said  Aragorn: 'leaf  from the Southfarthing in 
Isengard.  The more  I consider it, the more curious I find it. I have never  
been in Isengard,  but I have journeyed  in this  land, and I know  well the 
empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire. Neither goods nor folk 
have passed that  way for  many a long year, not openly. Saruman  had secret 
dealings with someone  in  the Shire, I  guess. Wormtongues may  be found in 
other houses than King Thjoden's. Was there a date on the barrels?' 
     'Yes,' said Pippin. 'It was the 1417 crop, that is last year's; no, the 
year before, of course, now: a good year.' 
     'Ah well, whatever evil  was  afoot is over now, I  hope; or else it is 
beyond our reach  at pr esent,' said Aragorn. 'Yet I think I shall mention it 
to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great affairs.' 
     'I wonder what he is doing,' said Merry. 'The  afternoon is getting on. 
Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at  any rate,  Strider,  
if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.' 

####- 
 

Chapter 10. The Voice of Saruman 

 
 
     They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of  stones, 
gazing at the  dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows, a menace still in 
the  desolation  that  lay  all about  it.  The waters  had  now  nearly all 
subsided.  Here  and  there  gloomy pools  remained,  covered with  scum and 
wreckage; but most of the wide circle was bare again, a  wilderness of slime 
and tumbled  rock, pitted with  blackened holes, and  dotted  with posts and 
pillars  leaning  drunkenly this  way and that. At the rim of the  shattered 
bowl  there lay vast mounds and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great 
storm; and  beyond them the  green and  tangled valley  ran up into the long  
ravine  between the  dark arms  of  the mountains. Across the waste they saw 
riders picking their way; they were coming from the north  side, and already 
they were drawing near to Orthanc. 
     'There is  Gandalf, and Thjoden and his men!' said Legolas. 'Let  us go 
and meet them!' 
     'Walk warily!' said Merry. 'There are loose  slabs that may tilt up and 
throw you down into a pit, if you don't take care.' 
     They  followed what was  left of  the road from  the gates  to Orthanc, 
going slowly,  for  the flag-stones  were cracked  and  slimed.  The riders,  
seeing them approach, halted under the  shadow of  the  rock and  waited for  
them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them. 
     'Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting  discussions, and made 
a few plans,' he said; 'and we have  all had  some much-needed  rest. Now we 
must  be going  on again.  I hope  you companions  have all rested, too, and 
refreshed yourselves?' 
     'We have,' said Merry. 'But  our discussions began and ended in  smoke. 
Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.' 
     'Do you indeed?' said Gandalf.  'Well, I do not. I have now a last task  
to do  before I  go: I must pay Saruman  a  farewell visit.  Dangerous,  and 
probably  u seless; but it must be done.  Those of you who wish may come with 
me -- but beware! And do not jest! This is not the time for it.' 
     'I will  come,' said Gimli. 'I wish to see him and  learn  if he really 
looks like you.' 
     'And how will you learn  that,  Master Dwarf?'  said  Gandalf. 'Saruman 

####-could  look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are 
you yet wise enough  to detect  all  his  counterfeits? Well, we shall  see, 
perhaps.  He  may  be  shy  of  showing himself before many  different  eyes 
together. But I have ordered all  the Ents to remove  themselves from sight, 
so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.' 
     'What's the danger?' asked Pippin. 'Will he shoot at  us, and pour fire 
out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?' 
     'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light  heart,' 
said Gandalf. 'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try.  
A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do 
not guess. Beware of his voice!' 
     They  came  now to  the foot of Orthanc.  It  was black, and  the  rock  
gleamed as if it were wet. The  many  faces of the  stone had sharp edges as 
though they had been newly chiselled. A  few  scorings. and small flake-like 
splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore of the fury  of the 
Ents. 
     On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great door, 
high above the  ground; and over it was a  shuttered window, opening upon  a 
balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold of the door there mounted 
a flight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn  by some unknown art of the same 
black stone. This was the only entrance to the tower;  but many tall windows 
were cut with deep embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like 
little eyes in the sheer faces of the horns. 
     At the  foot of the  stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. 'I will go 
up,' said Gandalf. 'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.' 
     'And I too will go up,' said the king. 'I am old, and fear no peril any 
more.  I wish to speak with the enemy who has  done me so  much wrong. 
Jomer 
shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not falter.' 
     'As you  will,' said  Gandalf. 'Aragorn shall  come with  me.  Let  the 
others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if 
there is anything to hear or see.' 
     'Nay!' said Gimli. 'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here 
represent our kindred. We also will come behind.' 
     'Come  then!' said Gandalf, and  with that  he climbed the  steps,  and 
Thjoden went beside him. 
     The Riders of Rohan sat  uneasily upon their horses,  on either side of 

####-the stair,  and  looked  up darkly  at  the great  tower, fearing what might 
befall their lord.  Merry and  Pippin  sat on the bottom step,  feeling both 
unimportant and unsafe. 
     'Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!' muttered Pippin.  'I wish I 
could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come for? We are 
not wanted.' 
     Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on it with his staff.  
It  rang  with  a  hollow  sound.  'Saruman, Saruman!'  he  cried in a  loud 
commanding voice.  'Saruman come forth!' 
     For  some time there was no answer.  At  last the window above the door  
was unbarred, hut no figure could be seen at its dark opening. 
     'Who is it?' said a voice. 'What do you wish?' 
     Thjoden started.  'I know that  voice,' he said, 'and I  curse  the day 
when I first listened to it.' 
     'Go  and  fetch Saruman,  since  you  have  become  his footman,  Grnma  
Wormtongue!' said Gandalf.  'And do not waste our time!' 
     The window closed. They  waited.  Suddenly another voice spoke, low and 
melodious, its very sound  an enchantment.  Those who  listened  unwarily to 
that voice could seldom  report the words that they heard;  and if they did, 
they wondered,  for  little power remained  in them. Mostly they  remembered 
only that it was a delight to  hear the  voice  speaking, all  that it  said 
seemed wise and  reasonable, and desire awoke in them  by swift agreement to 
seem  wise themselves.  When others  spoke  they seemed harsh and uncouth 
by 
contrast; and if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts of 
those under the spell. Fur some the spell lasted only while the voice  spoke 
to them, and when it spake to another they smiled, as men do who see through 
a  juggler's trick while others gape at it. For many the sound  of the voice 
alone was enough  to hold  them enthralled; but for those whom it  conquered 
the  spell endured when they were  far away. and ever  they heard that  soft  
voice whispering and  urging them. But none  were unmoved; none rejected its 
pleas and its commands without  an effort  of mind and will, so long as  its 
master had control of it.  
     'Well?' it  said now with  gentle  question. 'Why  must  you disturb my 
rest? Will you give me no peace  at  all by night or day?' Its tone was that 
of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved. 
     They  looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound of his coming; 

####-and they saw a figure standing at the  rail, looking  down upon them: an old 
man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which was not easy to tell, for  
it changed if they  moved  their eyes or if  he stirred. His  face was long, 
with  a high forehead, he had deep darkling eyes, hard to fathom, though the 
look  that they now  bore was grave and benevolent, and a  little weary. His 
hair and beard were white, but strands of black still showed about his  lips 
and ears. 
     'Like, and yet unlike,' muttered Gimli. 
     'But come now,' said the  soft voice. 'Two  at least of  you I know  by 
name.  Gandalf  I know too  well to  have much  hope that  he seeks help  or  
counsel here. But you, Thjoden Lord  of  the Mark  of Rohan are  declared by 
your noble devices, and still more by  the fair  countenance of the House of 
Eorl.  O worthy son of  Thengel the  Thrice-renowned! Why have you not  
come 
before, and as a friend? Much  have  I desired to see you, mightiest king of 
western lands, and especially  in these latter years, to  save you from  the 
unwise and evil counsels that beset  you!  Is it yet  too late? Despite  the 
injuries that have been done to me, in  which the  men of Rohan, alas!  have 
had some part, still  I  would save you, and deliver you from the ruin  that 
draws nigh inevitably,  if you  ride  upon this  road which you have  taken. 
Indeed I alone can aid you now.' 
     Thjoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing. He looked 
up  at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent down upon him, and 
then to Gandalf at his  side; and  he  seemed to hesitate. Gandalf  made  no  
sign; but stood silent as stone, as one waiting patiently for some call that 
has not  yet  come. The Riders stirred at first, murmuring with approval  of 
the words of Saruman; and then they too were silent,  as men spell-bound. It  
seemed to them that Gandalf had never spoken so  fair and fittingly to their 
lord.  Rough and proud  now seemed all his  dealings with  Thjoden. And over  
their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end of the Mark 
in a  darkness to which Gandalf was driving them, while Saruman stood beside 
a door of  escape, holding it half open so that a ray of light came through. 
There was a heavy silence. 
     It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. 'The words of this wizard 
stand on their heads,'  he growled, gripping  the handle of his axe. 'In the 
language  of  Orthanc  help  means ruin, and  saving means  slaying, that is 
plain. But we do not come here to beg.' 

####-     'Peace!'  said Saruman, and for  a  fleeting  moment his voice was less 
suave, and a  light flickered in his eyes and was gone.  'I do not  speak to 
you  yet,  Gimli  Gluin's son,' he said. 'Far  away  is  your home and small 
concern of yours are the  troubles of this land. But it was not by design of 
your own that  you  became  embroiled in them, and so I will  not blame such 
part as you have played-a valiant one, I doubt not. But I pray you, allow me  
first to speak with the King of Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend. 
     'What  have you to say,  Thjoden King? Will you have peace with me, and 
all  the aid that my  knowledge, founded in  long years, can bring? Shall we 
make our counsels together  against  evil days, and repair our injuries with 
such good will that our  estates  shall both come to fairer flower than ever 
before?' 
     Still Thjoden  did not  answer.  Whether he strove with anger or  doubt 
none could say. Jomer spoke. 
     'Lord, hear me!'  he said.  'Now  we feel the peril that we  were warned 
of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last amazed  by an old 
liar with honey on his forked tongue? So would the trapped wolf speak to the 
hounds,  if he could. What aid can he give  to you, forsooth? All he desires 
is  to  escape  from  his plight. But will you  parley  with this dealer  in 
treachery and murder? Remember Thjodred at  the Fords, and the grave of 
Hbma  
in Helm's Deep!' 
     'If  we speak of  poisoned tongues what  shall  we say of  yours, young 
serpent?' said Saruman,  and the  flash of  his  anger was now plain to see. 
'But  come,  Jomer, Jomund's  son!' he went on in his soft  voice again.  To 
every man h part. Valour in  arms is yours, and you win high honour thereby. 
Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and be content. Meddle not in policies 
which you do not understand. But maybe. if you become  a king, you Will find 
that he must choose his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and the 
power  of Orthanc  cannot be lightly thrown aside, whatever grievances, real 
or fancied, may lie behind. You have won  a battle  but  not a  war and that 
with help on  which you cannot count again.  You may  find the Shadow of the 
Wood at your  own door next:  it is wayward, and senseless, and  has no love 
for Men. 
     'But  my  lord of  Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because valiant 
men have fallen in battle?  If  you go to war,  needlessly,  for  I did  not 
desire  it, then men will be slain. But  if I am a murderer on that account, 

####-then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for they have fought many 
wars, and assailed many who defied  them. Yet with some they have afterwards 
made peace, none the worse for being politic. I say, Thjoden King:  shall we 
have peace and friendship, you and I? It is ours to command ' 
     'We will have peace,' said Thjoden  at last thickly and with an effort. 
Several of the  Riders  cried out gladly. Thjoden held up his hand. 'Yes, we 
will have peace,'  he said, now in a clear voice,  'we will have peace, when 
you and all your works have perished -- and the works of your dark master to 
whom you would deliver us. You are a liar. Saruman, and a corrupter of men's 
hearts.  You hold out your hand to me,  and  I perceive only a finger of the 
claw of  Mordor. Cruel  and cold! Even if your war on me was just as  it was 
not, for were you ten times as wise you  would have no right  to rule me and 
mine  for your own profit  as  you desired  --  even so, what will you say of 
your torches in Westfold  and  the children  that lie dead  there?  And they 
hewed Hbma's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he  was dead. 
When 
you hang from  a  gibbet at  your  window for the sport of your own crows, I 
will have peace with you and  Orthanc.  So  much  for  the House  of  Eorl. A 
lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not need to lick your fingers. Turn 
elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.' 
     The Riders gazed up at Thjoden like men startled  out of a dream. Harsh 
as an old raven's their master's  voice sounded in their ears after the music 
of Saruman. But Saruman for a while was beside himself with wrath. He leaned 
over the rail as if he would smite the King with his staff. To some suddenly 
it seemed that they saw a snake coiling itself to strike. 
     'Gibbets  and crows!'  he  hissed,  and they shuddered  at  the hideous 
change.  'Dotard!  What is  the house of  Eorl but  a  thatched  barn  where 
brigands  drink  in the reek,  and  their brats roll on the floor among  the 
dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the noose comes,  
slow in the  drawing,  tight and hard in the end. Hang if you will!' Now his 
voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself. 'I know not why I have had the 
patience  to speak  to you.  For I need  you not, nor  your  little band  of 
gallopers,  as swift to fly  as to  advance, Thjoden Horsemaster. Long ago I 
offered you a state beyond your merit and your wit. I have offered it again, 
so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give 
me brag and abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts!  
     'But you, Gandalf!  For  you  at  least I am grieved,  feeling for your 

####-shame. How comes  it  that you  can  endure such company? For you are proud, 
Gandalf-and not  without reason, having a noble mind and eyes that look both 
deep and far. Even now will you not listen to my counsel?' 
     Gandalf stirred, and looked up. 'What have you to say that you did  not 
say at our last meeting?' he asked. 'Or, perhaps, you have things to unsay?' 
     Saruman paused. 'Unsay?' he mused, as if puzzled. 'Unsay? I endeavoured 
to advise you for your own good, but  you scarcely listened. You  are  proud 
and  do not love advice,  having  indeed  a store of your own wisdom. But on 
that occasion  you erred, I think, misconstruing my  intentions wilfully.  I 
fear that in my eagerness to persuade you, I  lost  patience.  And  indeed I 
regret it. For I bore you no ill-will; and even now  I bear none, though you  
return to me in the company  of the violent and  the ignorant. How should I?  
Are  we not both members of  a high  and  ancient order, most  excellent  in 
Middle-earth? Our friendship would profit us both alike. Much we could still 
accomplish together, to heal the disorders of the  world.  Let us understand 
one another,  and  dismiss from thought these lesser folk! Let  them wait on 
our decisions! For the common good I am  willing to redress the past, and to 
receive you. Will you not consult with me? Will you not come up?' 
     So  great was the power that Saruman  exerted in this  last effort that 
none that stood  within hearing were unmoved. But  now the  spell was wholly 
different.  They  heard the  gentle remonstrance  of  a kindly  king with an 
erring but much-loved minister. But they were shut out, listening at a  door 
to  words  not  meant for  them: ill-mannered  children  or  stupid servants 
overhearing the  elusive discourse  of their  elders, and wondering  how  it 
would  affect their lot. Of  loftier mould these two were made: reverend and 
wise. It was inevitable that they should make alliance. Gandalf would ascend 
into  the  tower, to discuss  deep  things beyond their comprehension in the 
high chambers of  Orthanc. The door would be closed, and they would  be left  
outside, dismissed to await allotted work or punishment. Even in the mind of 
Thjoden the thought took shape, like a shadow of doubt: 'He will betray  us;  
he will go -- we shall be lost.' 
     Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke. 
     'Saruman, Saruman!' said Gandalf still  laughing.  'Saruman, you  missed 
your path  in life. You  should have been the king's jester  and earned your 
bread, and stripes  too, by  mimicking  his counsellors. Ah me!'  he paused, 
getting the better of his mirth. 'Understand one another? I fear I am beyond 
your comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand  now too well.  I keep  a  

####-clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than  you  suppose. When last I 
visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, 
the guest who has escaped from the roof,  will think  twice  before he comes 
back  in  by the door.  Nay,  I do  not think  I  will come  up. But listen, 
Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less 
strong than  your hope  and fancy made it. So may other  things in which you 
still have trust.  Would it not be well to leave it for  a while? To turn to 
new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come down?' 
     A shadow passed over Saruman's face; then it went deathly white. Before 
he could  conceal  it, they saw  through the mask the anguish of  a  mind in 
doubt, loathing to  stay and dreading to leave  its refuge. For a second  he 
hesitated, and no one breathed. Then he spoke,  and his voice was shrill and  
cold. Pride and hate were conquering him. 
     'Will I come down?' he mocked. 'Does an unarmed man come down to  
speak 
with  robbers out of doors? I can  hear you w ell enough here. I am no fool, 
and I do not trust you, Gandalf. They  do not stand openly on my stairs, but 
I know where the wild wood-demons are lurking, at your command.' 
     'The treacherous are ever distrustful,' answered  Gandalf wearily. 'But 
you need not fear for your skin.  I do not wish to kill you, or hurt you, as 
you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect 
you. I  am giving you  a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free --  if you  
choose.' 
     'That sounds  well,' sneered Saruman.  'Very  much  in  the  manner  of 
Gandalf  the Grey: so condescending, and  so very  kind. I do not doubt that 
you would find Orthanc  commodious,  and  my  departure convenient. But  
why 
should  I  wish  to  leave?  And  what  do you  mean  by  'free'?  There are 
conditions, I presume?' 
     'Reasons for leaving you can see from your  windows.' answered Gandalf. 
'Others  will  occur to  your  thought.  Your  servants  are  destroyed  and 
scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you  have cheated 
your new  master. or tried to do so. When his eye turns  hither,  it will be 
the red eye of wrath. But when I say  'free',  I mean  'free': free from bond, 
of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if 
you desire. But  you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your 
staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later,  if  you  

####-merit them.' 
     Saruman's face  grew  livid, twisted  with rage,  and a  red light  was 
kindled in his eyes.  He  laughed wildly. 'Later!' he  cried, and his  voice 
rose to a scream.  'Later! Yes,  when you  also  have the Keys  of Barad-dyr 
itself, I suppose; and the crowns of  seven kings. and the rods of  the Five 
Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair  of boots many sizes larger than 
those  that you  wear now.  A modest plan.  Hardly one in which  my help  is 
needed! I have other things to do. Do not be a fool. If you  wish  to  treat 
with me, while you have a chance, go away, and come back when you are 
sober! 
And leave behind  these cut-throats and small  rag-tag that  dangle at  your 
tail! Good day!' He turned and left the balcony. 
     'Come back,  Saruman!' said  Gandalf  in  a  commanding  voice. To  the  
amazement of the others, Saruman turned again. and as if dragged against his 
will, he  came slowly back to the  iron rail, leaning on it, breathing hard. 
His  face was lined and  shrunken.  His hand clutched  his heavy black staff 
like a claw. 
     'I did  not give you leave to  go,'  said Gandalf sternly. 'I have  not 
finished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You might still 
have turned away  from  folly and  evil, and  have been of  service. But you  
choose to  stay  and gnaw the ends of your old plots. Stay then!  But I warn 
you. you will not easily come out again.  Not  unless the  dark hands of the 
East stretch out to  take you. Saruman!'  he  cried, and his voice  grew  in 
power and authority. 'Behold, I am not Gandalf the Grey,  whom you betrayed. 
I am Gandalf the White, who has returned from death. You have no colour 
now, 
and I cast you from the order and from the Council.' 
     He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in  a clear cold voice.  'Saruman, 
your  staff is broken.' There was  a  crack, and the staff  split asunder in 
Saruman's hand, and the head  of  it fell down at Gandalf's feet. 'Go!' said 
Gandalf. With a  cry Saruman fell back  and crawled away.  At that  moment a  
heavy shining thing  came hurtling down from  above. It glanced off the iron  
rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to Gandalf's head, it smote 
the stair on which  he  stood. The rail  rang and snapped . The stair cracked 
and splintered in glittering sparks. But the ball was unharmed: it rolled on  
down the steps, a globe of crystal, dark,  but glowing with a heart of fire. 
As it bounded away towards a pool Pippin ran after it and picked it up. 

####-     'The murderous rogue!' cried Jomer.  But Gandalf was unmoved.  No, that 
was not thrown b Saruman, he said; nor even at his bidding, I think. It came  
from a window far above. A parting shot from Master Wormtongue, I fancy, 
but 
ill aimed.' 
     'The aim was poor, maybe, because he could  not make up  his mind which 
he hated more, you or Saruman,' said Aragorn. 
     'That may  be so,' said Gandalf.  'Small comfort will those two have in 
their  companionship:  they  will  gnaw  one  another  with  words.  But the 
punishment is just.  If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc alive,  it will  
be more than he deserves.  
     'Here, my  lad, I'll take that!  I did not ask  you  to handle it,'  he 
cried,  turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slowly, as if 
he  were bearing a great  weight. He went  down to meet him and hastily took 
the dark  globe from the hobbit,  wrapping it in the folds of his cloak.  'I  
will take care of this,' he  said. 'It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman 
would have chosen to cast away.' 
     'But he may have other things to cast,' said Gimli. 'If that is the end 
of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least!' 
     'It is the end,' said Gandalf. 'Let us go.' 
     They turned  their  backs on  the doors of Orthanc, and  went down. The 
riders  hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The  spell of Saruman 
was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl away, dismissed. 
     'Well, that is done,' said Gandalf. 'Now I must find Treebeard and tell 
him how things have gone.' 
     'He will have guessed,  surely?'  said  Merry. 'Were they likely to end 
any other way?' 
     'Not likely,' answered Gandalf, 'though  they came to  the balance of a  
hair. But I had reasons for  trying; some  merciful and some less so.  First  
Saruman was shown that the power  of his voice was waning. He cannot be 
both 
tyrant  and counsellor. When the plot  is ripe it remains  no longer secret. 
Yet he  fell into the trap, and tried to deal  with  his victims piece-meal, 
while  others listened. Then I  gave him a last choice and  a  fair  one: to 
renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and  make amends by helping 
us 
in our need.  He knows our need,  none better.  Great service he could  have 

####-rendered. But he  has chosen to withhold it, and  keep the power of Orthanc. 
He will not  serve, only command. He  lives now  in  terror of the shadow of 
Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding  the storm. Unhappy fool!  He will  
be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We 
cannot  destroy  Orthanc from without, but  Sauron  -- who knows  what he can 
do?' 
     'And what  if Sauron does  not conquer? What will you do to him?' asked 
Pippin. 
     'I? Nothing!' said Gandalf. 'I will do nothing  to him. I  do  not wish 
for mastery. What w ill become of him? I  cannot say. I grieve that so  much 
that was good now festers in the  tower. Still  for us things have  not gone 
badly. Strange are the turns of fortune!  Often does  hatred hurt  itself! I 
guess that, even if we had entered in, we  could have found few treasures in 
Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us.' 
     A shrill shriek; suddenly cut off, came from an open window high above. 
     'It seems  that  Saruman  thinks  so too,' said Gandalf.  'Let us leave 
them!' 
     They returned now to the ruins of the  gate. Hardly had they passed out 
under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled stones where  they 
had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came striding up. Aragorn, Gimli 
and Legolas gazed at them in wonder. 
     'Here  are three of my  companions,  Treebeard,' said Gandalf. 'I  have 
spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.' He named them one by one. 
     The Old Ent looked at them  long and searchingly, and spoke to  them in 
turn.  Last  he  turned  to Legolas.  'So  you  have  come  all the way from 
Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very great forest it used to be!' 
     'And still is,' said Legolas. 'But not so great that we who dwell there 
ever tire of seeing new trees. I  should dearly love to journey in Fangorn's 
Wood. I  scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and  I did not wish to turn 
back.' 
     Treebeard's eyes gleamed with pleasure. 'I hope you may have your wish,  
ere the hills be much older,' he said. 
     'I will come,  if  I  have the fortune,' said  Legolas.  'I have made a  
bargain  with  my friend  that, if  all  goes well,  we  will  visit Fangorn 
together -- by your leave.' 
     'Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,' said Treebeard. 
     'The  friend I speak of  is not an Elf,' said Legolas; 'I  mean  Gimli, 

####-Gluin's son here.' Gimli bowed  low,  and the  axe slipped from his belt and 
clattered on the ground. 
     'Hoom, hm! Ah now,' said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him. 'A  dwarf 
and  an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good  will to Elves; but you ask much. This 
is  a strange  friendship!' 'Strange it  may seem,' said Legolas; 'but while 
Gimli lives I shall not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but 
for  orc-necks, O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn's  Wood.  Forty-two he hewed in 
the battle.' 
     'Hoo! Come now!' said Treebeard.  'That is a better  story! Well, well, 
things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet them. But 
now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end, yet Gandalf says you 
must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark is eager for his own house.' 
     'Yes,  we must go, and go  now,' said Gandalf. 'I fear that I must take 
your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.' 
     'Maybe I shall,' said Treebeard. 'But I shall miss them. We have become 
friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting  hasty  -- growing 
backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there,  they  are the first  new thing 
under  Sun or Moon that I  have seen  for many a long,  long day. I shall not 
forget them. I have put their names into the Long List.  Ents will  remember  
it. 
     Ents the earthborn, old as mountains, 
     the wide-walkers, water drinking; 
     and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children, 
     the laughing-folk, the little people, 
     they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you well! 
But if you hear news up in your pleasant land,  in the Shire,  send me word!  
You  know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives. Come yourselves if 
you 
can!' 
     'We  will!'  said Merry  and  Pippin together,  and  they  turned  away 
hastily.  Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking  his 
head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.  
     'So Saruman would not leave?' he said. 'I did  not think  he would. His 
heart is as rotten as a black Huorn's. Still, if  I were overcome and all my 
trees destroyed, I would not come  while I had one dark  hole  left to  hide 
in.' 
     'No,'  said Gandalf.  'But  you have not plotted to  cover all the world 

####-with your trees and choke all other living things. But there  it is, Saruman 
remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs as he can.  He has the 
Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed to escape.' 
     'Indeed no!  Ents will see to that,' said Treebeard. 'Saruman shall not 
set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over him.' 
     'Good!' said  Gandalf. 'That is what I  hoped. Now I can go and turn to 
other matters with one care the less.  But you must be wary. The waters have 
gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels round the tower, I fear. I 
do  not  doubt  that  there were  deep ways  delved under Orthanc,  and that 
Saruman hopes to go and come  unmarked, before long.  If you  will undertake 
the labour, I beg you to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard 
remains  a  standing  pool,  or  you  discover  the outlets.  When  all  the 
underground places are drowned, and  the outlets blocked, then  Saruman must  
stay upstairs and look out of  the windows.' 
     'Leave it to  the Ents!' said Treebeard.  'We shall  search the  valley 
from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees are coming back to live 
here, old  trees,  wild trees. The Watchwood we will call it. Not a squirrel 
will go her e, but  I shall  know of it. Leave  it to Ents! Until seven times 
the years  in  which  he tormented  us  have passed,  we shall  not  tire of 
watching him.' 

####- 
 

Chapter 11. The Palantnr 

 
 
     The sun was sinking  behind the long  western arm of the mounta ins when 
Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set out again from 
Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of 
the 
king's men  went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down 
into the valley. The others followed at an easy pace. 
     Ents in a  solemn  row stood like  statues at the gate, with their long 
arms  uplifted, but they made  no sound. Merry and  Pippin looked back, when 
they had passed some way down the winding road.  Sunlight was  still shining 
in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey  ruins falling into 
darkness. Treebeard stood alone  there now, like the distant stump of an old 
tree: the hobbits thought of their first meeting, upon  the  sunny ledge far  
away on the borders of Fangorn. 
     They  came  to the pillar  of  the  White  Hand.  The  pillar was still 
standing,  but the graven hand had  been thrown  down  and broken into small 
pieces. Right in the middle  of the road  the long forefinger lay,  white in 
the dusk, its red nail darkening to black. 
     'The Ents pay attention to every detail!' said Gandalf.  
     They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley. 
     'Are we riding far tonight,  Gandalf?'  asked  Merry after  a while. 'I  
don't  know  how you feel with small rag-tag  dangling  behind you; but  the 
rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.' 
     'So you heard that?' said Gandalf. 'Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no 
longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it  is any comfort  
to your pride,  I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in 
his thoughts than all the rest of us.  Who you are; how  you came there, and 
why; what  you know;  whether you were captured,  and if so, how you escaped 
when all the Orcs perished -- it is with those little riddles that the great 
mind ¢f Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if 
you feel honoured by his concern.' 
     'Thank  you!' said Merry. 'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your 
tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a  

####-question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?' 
     Gandalf laughed. 'A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards should have a  
hobbit or two in their care -- to teach them the meaning of the word, and to 
correct them. I  beg your pardon.  But  I have given  thought even to  these 
simple matters.  We will ride for a few  hours, gently, until we come to the 
end of the valley. Tomorrow we must ride faster. 
     'When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king's 
house  at Edoras over the  plains, a ride  of  some days. But we have  taken 
thought and changed the plan. Messengers have gone ahead to Helm's  Deep, to 
warn them that  the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with 
many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than 
two 
or  three together are to go openly over the land,  by day or night, when it 
can be avoided.' 
     'Nothing or a double helping is  your way!'  said Merry. 'I am afraid I 
was not looking beyond tonight's bed. Where and what are Helm's Deep and all 
the rest of it? I don't know anything about this country.' 
     'Then you'd best learn  something, if you  wish to  understand  what is 
happening.  But  not just  now, and not from  me: I have too  many  pressing 
things to think about.' 
     'All right, I'll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he's less  testy. But 
why all this secrecy? I thought we'd won the battle!' 
     Yes,  we  have  won,  but  only  the first victor  and  that  in itself 
increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and Mordor, 
which 
I have not yet fathomed. How they exchanged news I am not sure; but they did 
so.  The Eye  of Barad-dyr will be looking impatiently towards  the Wizard's 
Vale, I think; and towards Rohan. The less it sees the better.' 
     The road passed  slowly, winding down the valley. Now  further, and now 
nearer Isen flowed in its stony bed. Night came down from the mountains. All 
the mists were gone. A  chill wind blew. The moon, now  waxing round, filled 
the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen.  The  shoulders of  the mountain  to 
their  right  sloped down to bare hills.  The wide plains opened grey before 
them. 
     At  last they halted. Then they turned aside,  leaving the highway  and 
taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going westward a mile or so they came 
to a dale. It  opened southward,  leaning back into the slope  of  round Dol 

####-Baran,  the last  hill of  the northern ranges,  greenfooted,  crowned  with 
heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy with last  year's bracken,  among  
which the tight -curled  fronds of  spring  were just  thrusting through  the 
sweet-scented earth. Thornbushes grew thick  upon the low banks,  and  under  
them they made their camp,  two hours  or so before  the middle of the night.  
They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of  a spreading  hawthorn,  
tall as a tree, writhen with age; but hale in every limb. Buds were swelling 
at each twig's tip. 
     Guards were  set,  two at a watch.  The  rest, after  they had  supped, 
wrapped  themselves in a cloak and blanket and  slept. The  hobbits lay in a  
corner by themselves  upon a pile  of old  bracken.  Merry was  sleepy,  but 
Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken cracked and rustled, as he 
twisted and turned. 
     'What's the matter?' asked Merry. 'Are you lying on an ant-hill?' 
     'No,'  said Pippin, 'but  I'm not  comfortable. I wonder how long it is 
since I slept in a bed?' 
     Merry  yawned. 'Work  it out on your fingers!' he said.  'But you  must  
know how long it is since we left Lurien.' 
     'Oh, that!' said Pippin. 'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.' 
     'Well,  Rivendell  then,'  said  Merry.  'But  I could  sleep  anywhere 
tonight.' 
     'You had the luck, Merry,' said Pippin softly, after a long pause. 'You  
were riding with Gandalf.' 
     'Well, what of it?' 
     'Did you get any news, any information out of him?' 
     'Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most of it: 
you were close by,  and we were talking no secrets. But you  can go with him 
tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him-and if he'll have you.' 
     'Can I? Good! But he's close, isn't he? Not changed at all.' 
     'Oh  yes, he is!'  said Merry,  waking  up  a little, and  beginning to 
wonder what was bothering his companion. 'He has grown, or something. He 
can 
be  both  kinder  and  more alarming, merrier and more solemn than before, I 
think. He has changed; but  we have not had a chance to see  how  much, yet. 
But th ink of the last part of that  business  with Saruman! Remember Saruman 
was  once Gandalf's superior: head  of  the  Council, whatever  that  may be 

####-exactly. He was Saruman the White. Gandalf is the  White  now.  Saruman 
came 
when he was told, and  his rod was taken;  and then he was just told  to go, 
and he went!' 
     'Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he's closer than ever that's 
all,' Pippin argued. 'That-glass  ball, now. He seemed mighty  pleased  with 
it. He knows or  guesses something about i t. But does he tell  us  what? No, 
not  a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved  it  from rolling into  a pool. 
Here, I'll take that, my lad -- that's all. I wonder what it  is? It felt so 
very heavy.' Pippin's voice fell very low as if he was talking to h imself.  
     'Hullo!' said  Merry. 'So that's what is bothering you? Now, Pippin  my 
lad, don't  forget Gildor's  saying  --  the one Sam  used to quote:  Do  not 
meddle in the at Fairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger.' 
     'But  our  whole  life for  months  has been  one long meddling  in the 
affairs  of Wizards,' said Pippin.  'I  should like a bit  of information as 
well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.' 
     'Go to  sleep!'  said Merry. 'You'll  get information enough, sooner or 
later. My  dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a  Brandybuck for inquisitiveness;  
but is this the time, I ask you?' 
     'All right! What's the harm in my  telling you  what  I should like:  a  
look  at that stone? I know I can't have it, with old Ganda lf sitting on it, 
like a hen on an egg. But it doesn't help much to get no more from you  than 
a you-can't-have-it so-go-to-sleep!' 
     'Well, what else could  I say?' said Merry. 'I'm sorry, Pippin, but you  
really must wait  till the  morning.  I'll  be as curious as you  like after  
breakfast, and I'll  help in any  way I can at wizard-wheedling. But I can't  
keep awake  any  longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good  
night!' 
     Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away; and 
it was not  encouraged by  the  sound of Merry breathing softly, asleep in a  
few minutes  after saying good night. 'The thought of  the dark globe seemed 
to grow stronger as all grew quiet.  Pippin felt  again its  weight  in  his 
hands, and saw again the mysterious red depths into which he had  looked for 
a moment. He tossed and turned and tried to think of something else. 
     At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked round. It was 
chilly, and he wrapped  his cloak about him.   The  moon was shining cold and 
white, down into  the  dell, and  the shadows of the bushes were black.  All 

####-about lay sleeping shapes. The  two guards were not in view: they were up on 
the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the bracken. Driven by some  impulse that he 
did not understand,  Pippin  walked  softly to  where Gandalf lay. He looked 
down at him. The wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there 
was a  glitter  of eyes under his long  lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily. 
But  Gandalf  made no sign;  and drawn forward once more, half  against  his 
will, the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard's head. He was rolled 
in  a blanket, with  his cloak  spread over  the  top; and close beside him, 
between his right  side and  his  bent arm,  there was a hummock,  something 
round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand seemed only just to have slipped off  
it to the ground. 
     Hardly breathing, Pippin  crept nearer, foot by  foot. At last he knelt 
down. Then he put his hands out  stealthily, and slowly  lifted the lump up: 
it did not  seem quite  so heavy as he  had  expected. 'Only some  bundle of 
oddments, perhaps, after all,'  he thought  with  a strange sense of relief;  
but he did not put the bundle down again. He stood for a moment clasping it . 
Then an idea came into his mind.  He  tiptoed away, found a large stone, and  
came back. 
     Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and kneeling 
down, laid it back by the wizard's hand. Then at last he looked at the thing 
that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth globe of crystal, now dark and 
dead, lying bare before his knees. Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in 
his own cloak, and half turned to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf 
moved in his sleep, and muttered some words: they seemed  to be in a strange 
tongue; his hand groped  out  and clasped the  wrapped stone, then he sighed  
and did not move again. 
     'You  idiotic fool!' Pippin muttered  to himself. 'You're going  to get 
yourself into frightful  trouble. Put it back quick!'  But he found now that 
his knees  quaked, and he did not  dare to  go  near enough to the wizard to 
reach  the  bundle.  'I'll never get  it back  now without  waking  him,' he 
thought, 'not till I'm a bit calmer. S¢ I may as well have a look first. Not 
just  here though!'  He stole away, and sat down on a green hillock not  far 
from his bed. The moon looked in over the edge of the dell. 
     Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball  between  them. He bent 
low over it, looking like a greedy  child stooping over a bowl of food, in a  
corner away from  others. He drew his cloak aside and gazed at  it. The  air 
seemed still and tense about him. At first the globe was dark, black as jet, 

####-with the moonlight gleaming on its surface. Then ther e came a faint glow and 
stir in the heart of it, and it held his eyes, so that now he could not look  
away. Soon all  the inside  seemed on fire;  the ball  was spinning,  or the 
lights within were  revolving. Suddenly the lights went out.  He gave a gasp  
and struggled; but  he  remained bent,  clasping the ball  with  both hands.  
Closer and closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips moved soundlessly 
for a while. Then with a strangled cry he fell back and lay still. 
     The cry was  piercing. The guards  leapt down from  the banks.  All the 
camp was soon astir. 
     'So this is the thief!' said Gandalf.  Hastily  he cast his  cloak over  
the  globe where  it lay.  'But  you, Pippin!  This is a  grievous  turn  to 
things!' He knelt by  Pippin's body: the hobbit was lying on his back rigid, 
with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky. 'The devilry! What mischief has he  
done-to himself, and to all of us?' The wizard's face was drawn and haggard.  
     He took Pippin's hand and bent over his face, listening for his breath; 
then he laid  his hands on his brow.  The hobbit shuddered. His eyes closed.  
He cried  out;  and sat  up. staring in bewilderment at all the  faces round 
him, pale in the moonlight. 
     'It is not for you, Saruman!' he  cried in a shrill and toneless  voice 
shrinking away from Gandalf. 'I will send for it at once. Do you understand?  
Say just that!' Then he struggled to get up and escape but Gandalf held  him 
gently and firmly. 
     'Peregrin Took!' he said. 'Come back!' 
     The  hobbit relaxed  and  fell  back,  clinging  to  the wizard's hand. 
'Gandalf!' he cried. 'Gandalf! Forgive me!' 
     'Forgive you?' said the wizard. 'Tell me first what you have done!' 
     'I, I  took  the  ball  and looked at it,' stammered Pippin; 'and I saw 
things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I couldn't. And then 
he came  and questioned  me; and  he looked  at me, and,  and  that is all I 
remember.' 
     'That won't  do,' said Gandalf sternly. 'What did you see, and what did 
you say?' 
     Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared at 
him in  silence, except Merry who turned away. But  Gandalf's face was still  
hard.  'Speak!' he said. 
     In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words grew 
clearer  and  stronger. 'I saw a  dark sky, and tall battlements,' he  said. 

####-'And tiny  stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet hard and  clear. 
Then the stars went in and out-they were  cut off by things with wings. Very 
big, I think, really; but  in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round 
the tower. I  thought  there  were nine of them.  One  began to fly straight 
towards  me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible -- no, no! I can't  
say. 
     'I tried to get  away, because I thought  it would fly out; but when it 
had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then he came. He did not speak so  
that I could hear words. He just looked, and I understood. 
     '"So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for so long?" 
     'I did not answer. He said: "Who are you?" I still did not answer,  but 
it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: "A hobbit." 
     'Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel. 
It was like being  stabbed with knives. I struggled.  But  he sa id: "Wait  a  
moment!  We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman  that this dainty is not for  
him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!" 
     'Then  he gloated over me. I felt  I was  falling  to pieces. No, no! I 
can't say any more. I  don't remember anything else.' 
     'Look at me!' said Gandalf. 
     Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze for a  
moment  in silence. Then  his face grew  gentler, and the shadow  of a smile 
appeared. He laid his hand softly on Pippin's head. 
     'All right!' he said. 'Say no more! You have taken no harm. There is no 
lie in your eyes, as I feared. But  he did not speak long with you.  A fool, 
but an honest  fool,  you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser ones might  have done 
worse  in such  a  pass. But mark this!  You  have  been saved, and all your 
friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is called. You cannot count on it 
a second  time. If he had  questioned  you, then and there, almost certainly 
you would have told all that you know, to the ruin of us all. But he was too 
eager. He did not want information only: he wanted you,  quickly, so that he 
could deal with you in the  Dark Tower, slowly.  Don't shudder! If  you will 
meddle  in  the affairs  of Wizards, you  must  be prepared  to think of such 
things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not turned out as 
evilly as they might.' 
     He  lifted  Pippin  gently  and  carried  him  back to  his bed.  Merry 
followed, and sat down beside him. Lie there and rest, if you can,  Pippin!' 
said Gandalf. 'Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms again, tell me of 

####-it!  Such things can be cured. But anyway, my dear hobbit, don't put  a lump  
of  rock  under  my  elbow  again! Now, I will leave you  two together for a  
while.' 
     With  that Gandalf  returned to the others, who  were still standing by 
the  Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. 'Peril comes in the night when least 
expected,' he said. 'We have had a narrow escape!' 
     'How is the hobbit, Pippin?' asked Aragorn. 
     'I think all  will  be well  now,' answered  Gandalf. 'He was  not held 
long, and  hobbits have  an  amazing power of  recovery. The memory, or  the 
horror of it, will probably fade  quickly. Too  quickly, perhaps. Will  you, 
Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.' 
     'Dangerous indeed, but not to all,' said Aragorn. 'There is one who may 
claim it by right.  For this assuredly  is the palantnr of Orthanc  from the 
treasury  of  Elendil, set here by  the Kings  of Gondor. Now my hour  draws 
near. I will take it.' 
     Gandalf looked  at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the others, he 
lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it. 
     'Receive it,  lord!' he said: 'in earnest of other things that shall be 
given back. But if I may counsel you in the use  of your own, do not use  it 
-- yet! Be wary!' 
     'When have I been hasty or unwary, who have  waited and prepared for so 
many long years?' said Aragorn. 
     'Never  yet.  Do not then  stumble at the end  of the  road,'  answered 
Gandalf. 'But  at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others that 
stand  here! The hobbit, Peregrin,  above  all should not know  where it  is 
bestowed.  The evil fit may come on him again. For alas! he  has  handled it  
and  looked in it, as should never have  happened. He ought  never  to  have  
touched it in Isengard,  and  there I should have been quicker. But my  mind 
was bent  on Saruman, and I did not at once  guess the  nature of the Stone. 
Then I was weary, and as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!' 
     'Yes, there can  be no doubt,' said Aragorn. 'At last we know the link' 
between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is explained.' 'Strange 
powers have our enemies, and strange  weaknesses!' said Thjoden. 'But it has 
long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar. ' 
     'That many times is seen,' said Gandalf. 'But at this time we have been 
strangely fortunate. Maybe, I  have been  saved by this  hobbit from a grave 
blunder. I  had considered whether or not to probe this Stone myself to find 

####-its uses. Had I done so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not  
ready for such a  trial, if indeed I  shall ever be so:  But even if I found 
the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous for  him to see me, yet  
-- until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.' 
     'That hour is now come, I think,' said Aragorn. 
     'Not yet,' said Gandalf. 'There remains a short while of doubt which we 
must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that  the Stone was in  Orthanc  -- 
why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit  was captive there,  driven 
to look in the  glass for his  torment by  Saruman.  That dark mind will  be 
filled  now with  the voice  and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it 
may take some time before he  learns his error. We must snatch that time. We 
have been too leisurely. We must  move. The neighbourhood of  Isengard is no 
place now  to  linger in. I will  ride ahead at once with Peregrin  Took. It 
will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.' 
     'I will keep  Jomer and ten Riders,'  said the  king. 'They shall  ride 
with me at early day.  The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as they 
have a mind.' 
     'As you  will,'  said Gandalf. 'But  make all  the speed you may to the 
cover of the hills, to Helm's Deep!' 
     At that moment  a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight seemed to 
be suddenly cut  off. Several of the Riders cried out, and crouched, holding 
their  arms above  their hea ds, as if to ward off a blow from above: a blind 
fear and a deadly  cold fell on them. Cowering they looked up. A vast winged 
shape  passed over the moon like a  black cloud. It wheeled and went  north, 
flying at a speed greater than any wind of Middle-earth. The  stars  fainted 
before it. It was gone. 
     They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms out and 
downwards, stiff, his hands clenched. 
     'Nazgyl!' he cried.  'The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The  
Nazgyl have crossed the River!  Ride, ride! Wait  not for the  dawn! Let not  
the swift wait for the slow! Ride!' 
     He  sprang  away, calling Shadowfax  as  he ran.  Aragorn followed him.  
Going  to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. 'You shall come with me 
this  time,' he said.  'Shadowfax shall show you his  paces.' Then he ran to 
the place  where he had slept. Shadowfax  stood there  already. Slinging the  
small bag which was all his luggage  across his  shoulders, the wizard leapt 
upon the  horse's back. Aragor n lifted Pippin and set him in Gandalf's arms,  

####-,wrapped in cloak and blanket. 
     'Farewell! Follow fast!' cried Gandalf. 'Away, Shadowfax!' 
     The  great  horse  tossed his  head. His  flowing tail  flicked in  the 
moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the  earth, and was gone like the 
north wind from the mountains.  
     'A beautiful, restful  night!' said  Merry to Aragorn. 'Some folk  have 
wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride with Gandalf 
-- and there he goes! Instead of being turned into  a stone himself to stand 
here for ever as a warning.' 
     'If  you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not  he, how 
would it be now?' said Aragorn. 'You might have done worse. Who can say? 
But 
now it is your luck to come with me, I fear. At  once. Go and get ready, and  
bring anything that Pippin left behind. Make haste!' 
     Over the  plains  Shadowfax  was  flying,  needing  no  urging  and  no 
guidance. Less than  an hour  had  passed, and they had reached the Fords of 
Isen and crossed  them. The Mound of the Riders and its cold spears lay grey 
behind them. 
     Pippin was recovering. He  was warm, but the wind in his  face was keen 
and refreshing. He was  with  Gandalf. The horror of  the stone  and  of the 
hideous shadow over the  moon was fading, things left behind in the mists of 
the mountains or in a passing dream. He drew a deep breath. 
     'I did not know  you rode bare-back, Gandalf,' he said. 'You  haven't a  
saddle or a bridle!' 
     'I  do not ride elf-fashion,  except on Shadowfax,' said Gandalf.  'But 
Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax:  he is willing to 
carry you -or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It  is then his business 
to see that you remain on his back, unless you jump off into the air.' 
     'How  fast is  he going?'  asked Pippin. 'Fast  by  the  wind, but very 
smooth. And how light his footfalls are!' 
     'He  is  running  now  as  fast  as  the swiftest horse could  gallop,' 
answered Gandalf; 'but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a little 
here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see how the White 
Mountains are  drawing near under the stars! Yonder are the  Thrihyrne peaks 
like black spears. It will not  be long before we reach the  branching roads 
and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was fought two nights ago.' 
     Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly to 

####-himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues, as the miles ran 
under them. At last the wizard passed into a song of which the hobbit caught  
the  words: a few lines came clear  to his  ears  through the rushing of the 
wind: 
     Tall ships and tall kings 
     Three times three, 
     What brought they from the foundered land  
     Over the flowing sea? 
     Seven stars and seven stones 
     And one white tree. 
     'What are you saying, Gandalf?' asked Pippin. 
     'I was  just  running over  some of the  Rhymes  of  Lore in  my mind ' 
answered  the wizard. 'Hobbits,  I suppose, have forgotten  them, even those  
that they ever knew.' 
     'No, not  all,'  said  Pippin.  'And  we have many  of our  own,  which 
wouldn't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard  this one. What is it 
about -- the seven stars and seven stones?' 
     'About the palantnri of the Kings of Old,' said Gandalf. 
     'And what are they?' 
     'The name meant  that which looks far away. The Orthanc-stone was one.' 
     'Then it was not made, not made'  -- Pippin hesitated -- 'by the Enemy?' 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor by  Saruman. It is  beyond his art, and beyond  
Sauron's too. The palantnri came from beyond Westernesse  from Eldamar.  
The 
Noldor made  them. Flanor himself,  maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago 
that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is  nothing that Sauron 
cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for  Saruman! It was his downfall,  as  I now 
perceive.  Perilous to us all  are the devices  of an  art  deeper  than  we 
possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool!  to keep it secret, for  
his own  profit. No word did he ever  speak of it to any of the  Council. We 
had not yet given  thought  to the fate of  the palantnri of Gondor  in  its 
ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even  in Gondor they were a  
secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of 
lore among the D®nedain.' 
     'What  did  the Men of old use  them for?' asked Pippin, delighted  and 
astonished at getting answers to  so  many questions, and wondering how long 
it would last. 

####-     'To  see far  off, and to converse in thought with  one  another,' said 
Gandalf. 'In that way they long guarded and united the realm of Gondor. They 
set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at  Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring 
of Isengard. The  chief  and master of these was under  the Dome of Stars at 
Osgiliath before  its ruin. The three others were far  away in the North. In 
the house  of Elrond  it is told that they were at Ann®minas, and  Amon Syl, 
and Elendil's Stone was on the Tower Hills that look towards M ithlond in the 
Gulf of Lune where the grey ships lie. 
     'Each palantnr replied to each, but all those in Gondor were  ever open 
to the view of Osgiliath.  Now  it appears that,  as the rock of Orthanc has 
withstood  the  storms of time, so  there  the palantnr  of  that tower  has 
remained.  But alone  it could do nothing but see small images of things far 
off  and days remote. Very  useful, no doubt, that  was  to Saruman;  yet it 
seems that he was not content. Further and further abroad he gazed, until  he 
cast his gaze upon Barad-dyr. Then he was caught! 
     'Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie buried, or  
drowned deep? But  one. at least Sauron  must have obtained and  mastered to 
his purposes. I guess that  it was the Ithil-stone,  for he took Minas Ithil 
long ago and turned it into an evil place: Minas Morgul, it has become. 
     'Easy  it  is  now to guess how quickly the roving  eye of Saruman  was 
trapped and held; and how  ever  since he has been persuaded  from afar, and 
daunted when persuasion  would not serve. The biter bit, the  hawk under the 
eagle's foot, the spider  in a  steel web!  How long, I  wonder, has he been 
constrained to  come often to his glass for inspection and instruction,  and 
the Orthanc-stone so bent towards Barad-dyr  that, if  any  save  a will  of 
adamant now looks into it,  it will bear his mind and sight swiftly thither? 
And  how it draws  one to itself! Have I  not  felt it?  Even now  my  heart 
desires to test my will  upon it,  to see if I could not wrench it from  him 
and turn it where I  would-to look across the wide seas of water and of time 
to Tirion the Fair, and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of Flanor at 
their work, while both  the  White Tree and the  Golden were  in flower!' He 
sighed and fell silent. 
     'I wish I had known all this before,' said Pippin. 'I had  no notion of 
what I was doing.' 
     'Oh yes,  you had,' said  Gandalf. 'You  knew you were behaving wrongly 
and  foolishly;  and you told yourself so,  though you did not listen. I did 
not tell you all this before, because  it is only by  musing on all that has 

####-happened that I have at last  understood, even as we ride together. But if I  
had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier  
to  resist.  On the  contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After  that 
advice about fire goes to the heart.' 
     'It does,' said  Pippin. 'If all the seven  stones were laid out before 
me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.' 
     'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped.' 
     'But I should like to know--' Pippin began. 
     'Mercy!' cried Gandalf. 'If the giving of information is to be the cure 
of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my  days in answering 
you. What more do you want to know?' 
     'The  names  of all the stars, and of all living  things, and the whole 
history of Middle-earth and Over -heaven and of  the Sundering Seas ' laughed 
Pippin. 'Of  course!  What less? But I  am  not in  a hurry tonight.  At the 
moment  I was  just wondering about the  black  shadow. I  heard  you  shout 
"messenger of Mordor". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?' 
     'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgyl,' said Gandalf. 'It could have 
taken you away to the Dark Tower . ' 
     'But it was not  coming  for me, was  it?' faltered Pippin. 'I mean, it 
didn't know that I had... ' 
     'Of course not,' said  Gandalf. 'It is two hundred  leagues or  more in 
straight  flight  from Barad-dyr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgyl  would take a  
few hours to fly between  them.  But Saruman certainly looked  in  the Stone  
since the orc-raid, and more of his secret thought, I do not doubt, has been 
read than he  intended. A  messenger has  been sent  to  find out what he is 
doing. And  after what has happened tonight another will come, I think,  and 
swiftly. So Saruman will come to  the last pinch of the vice that he has put 
his  hand in. He has  no captive to  send. He has no Stone to see  with, and 
cannot answer the summons. Sauron will  only  believe that he  is withholding 
the captive and refusing to use the Stone. It will not  help Saruman to tell 
the truth to the messenger. For Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still safe 
in Orthanc. So  whether  he  will  or  no,  he  will appear a rebel. Yet  he 
rejected  us, so as  to  avoid  that very thing! What he will  do in such  a  
plight,  I  cannot guess.  He has power still, I think, while in Orthanc, to 
resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He may try to trap  the Nazgyl, 
or  at least to slay the thing on which it now rides the  air. In  that case 
let Rohan look to its horses!  

####-     'But I cannot tell how it will fall out, well or ill for us. It may  be 
that the counsels of the Enemy will  be confused,  or hindered by  his wrath 
with Saruman. It  may be that he will learn that  I was there and stood upon 
the stairs of Orthanc-with  hobbits at my tail. Or that  an heir  of Elendil 
lives and stood beside  me. If Wormtongue was not deceived by the  armour of 
Rohan, he would remember Aragorn and the title that he claimed. That is what 
I fear. And so we fly  -- not  from  danger but  into  greater danger.  Every 
stride of Shadowfax bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow, Peregrin Took.' 
     Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if a sudden chill had 
struck him. Grey land passed under them. 
     'See now!' said Gandalf. 'The Westfold dales  are  opening  before  us.  
Here we come back to the eastward  road. The dark shadow yonder is the 
mouth 
of the  Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond a nd the  Glittering Caves.  Do 
not ask  me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the first time 
you  may  get an answer  longer than you wish.  You  will not see the  caves 
yourself, not on this journey. Soon they will be far behind.' 
     'I thought you were going to stop  at Helm's Deep!' said Pippin. 'Where 
are you going then?' 
     'To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it.' 
     'Oh! And how far is that?' 
     'Leagues  upon  leagues,'  answered  Gandalf.  'Thrice as  far  as  the 
dwellings of King Thjoden, and they are more than a hundred  miles east from 
here, as  the  messengers of  Mordor fly. Shadowfax must run  a longer road.  
Which will prove the swifter? 
     'We  shall ride  now till  daybreak, and that is  some hours away.  Then 
even Shadowfax must  rest, in some hollow of the  hills: at Edoras, I  hope. 
Sleep, if  you can! You  may see the first  glimmer of dawn upon the  golden  
roof of  the house of Eorl. And in two days thence you shall see the  purple 
shadow  of Mount Mindolluin and the  walls of the tower of Denethor white in 
the morning. 
     'Away  now,  Shadowfax!  Run,  greatheart,  run as  you have never  run 
before! Now we are come to the lands  where you were foaled  and every stone 
you know. Run now! Hope is in speed!' 
     Shadowfax tossed his head and cried aloud, as if a trumpet had summoned 
him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire flew from his feet; night rushed 
over him. 

####-     As he  fell  slowly into  sleep, Pippin had a  strange feeling:  he and 
Gandalf  were  still as stone, seated  upon the  statue of a running  horse, 
while the world rolled away beneath his feet with a great noise of wind. 
 
 

####- * BOOK IV *  

 

 
 
 

Chapter 1. The Taming of Smjagol 

 
 
     'Well, master,  we're in  a fix and  no mistake,'  sa id Sam  Gamgee. He 
stood despondently with hunched shoulders beside Frodo, and peered out  with 
puckered eyes into the gloom. 
     It was the third evening since they had fled from  the Company,  as far 
as they could  tell:  they had  almost lost count of  the  hours during which 
they had climbed and laboured among the barren slopes and stones of the 
Emyn 
Muil,  sometimes retracing  their  steps  because  they could  find  no  way 
forward,  sometimes discovering  that they  had wandered in a circle back to 
where they  had been hours before. Yet on the whole they had worked steadily 
eastward, keeping as near as they could find a way to the outer edge of this 
strange  twisted  knot of hills. But  always  they  found its  outward faces 
sheer,  high  and  impassable, frowning  over  the plain  below;  beyond its 
tumbled skirts lay livid festering marshes where nothing moved and not  even 
a bird was to be seen. 
     The hobbits stood now on the brink of a tall cliff, bare and bleak, its 
feet wrapped in mist; and behind them rose the broken highlands crowned with 
drifting  cloud. A chill wind` blew from the East. Night was gathering  over  
the shapeless  lands before them; the sickly  green of them was fading  to a  
sullen brown. Far away to the right the Anduin, that had gleamed fitfully in 
sun-breaks during the day, was now  hidden in shadow. But their eyes did not 
look beyond the  River,  back to Gondor, to  their friends, to the lands  of 
Men. South and east they stared to where, at the edge of the oncoming night,  
a dark line hung, like distant mountains  of motionless smoke. Every now and 
again a  tiny red gleam far away  flickered upwards on the rim of earth  and 
sky. 
     `What a fix! ' said Sam.  `That's the one place  in all the lands we've 
ever heard of that we  don't want to see any closer; and that's the one place 
we're trying  to  get  to! And  that's just where we can't get, nohow. We've 
come the wrong way altogether, seemingly. We can't get down;  and if  we did 

####-get down, we'd find all that green land a nasty bog, I'll warrant. Phew! Can 
you smell it?' He sniffed at the wind. 
     'Yes, I can smell  it,'  said Frodo, but he did not move,  and his eyes 
remained fixed, staring out towards the  dark line and the flickering flame. 
`Mordor! ' he muttered under his breath. 'If I  must go there I wish I could 
come there quickly and make an  end! ' He shuddered. The wind was chilly and 
yet heavy with an odour of cold decay.  `Well,' he said, at last withdrawing 
his eyes, `we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more 
sheltered spot,  and camp once more; and perhaps another  day will show us a 
path.' 
     'Or another and another and another,' muttered Sam.  `Or  maybe no day.  
We've come the wrong way.' 
     'I wonder,' said Frodo. 'It's my  doom, I think, to go  to  that Shadow 
yonder, so that a way will  be found.  But will good or evil show it to  me?  
What hope we had was in speed. Delay plays into the Enemy's hands-and here I 
am: delayed. Is it the will of the Dark Tower that steers us? All my choices 
have proved ill. I should have  left the Company long  before, and come down 
from the North, east of the River and of the Emyn Muil, and so over the hard 
of Battle Plain  to the passes of Mordor. But now it isn't possible  for you  
and me alone to find a way back, and the Orcs are prowling on the east bank. 
Every  day that passes is a precious day lost. I am tired, Sam. I don't know 
what is to be done. What food have we got left?' 
     'Only those, what d'you call 'em, lembas, Mr. Frodo. A fair supply. But 
they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never thought, though, when I 
first set tooth in them, that I should ever come to wish for a change. But I 
do now: a bit of plain bread, and a mug -- aye, half  a mug  -- of beer would 
go down proper. I've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last  camp, 
and what use  has  it been? Naught  to  make a fire with, for  a start;  and 
naught to cook, not even grass!' 
     They turned  away and went down into a  stony hollow. The westering sun 
was caught into clouds,  and night came swiftly. They slept as  well as they 
could  for the  cold, turn and  turn about,  in a  nook among  great  jagged 
pinnacles of weathered rock; at  least they were sheltered from the easterly 
wind. 
     `Did you see them  again, Mr . Frodo?' asked Sam, as they sat, stiff and 
chilled, munching wafers of  lembas, in the cold grey of early morning. 
     'No,' said Frodo. `I've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights 

####-now.' 
     `Nor me,' said  Sam. `Grrr!  Those eyes did give me a  turn! But perhaps 
we've shaken  him off at  last, the miserable slinker. Gollum! I'll give him 
gollum in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.' 
     'I  hope  you'll never need to,'  said  Frodo.  `I don't  know  how  he 
followed us; but it may be that  he's lost us again, as you say. In this dry 
bleak  land we  can't leave  many  footprints, nor much scent, even  for his 
snuffling nose.' 
     'I hope that's the way of it,' said Sam. 'I wish we could be rid of him 
for good!' 
     'So do I,' said Frodo; 'but he's not my chief trouble. I wish we  could 
get away from these hills! I hate them. I feel all naked on  the  east side, 
stuck up here with  nothing but  the  dead  flats between me and that Shadow 
yonder. There's an Eye in it. Come on! We've got to get down today somehow.' 
     But  that day wore on, and  when  afternoon faded towards evening  they 
were still scrambling along the ridge and had found no way of escape. 
     Sometimes in the silence of that barren country they fancied  that they 
heard faint sounds behind  them, a stone falling,  or the  imagined step  of 
flapping feet on the rock. But if they halted  and  stood  still  listening, 
they heard  no more,  nothing but  the  wind sighing over  the  edges of the 
stones -- yet even that reminded them of breath softly hissing through sharp 
teeth. 
     All that  day  the  outer  ridge of the  Emyn  Muil  had  been  bending 
gradually northward,  as  they  struggled  on.  Along  its  brink there  now 
stretched  a wide tumbled flat of scored and  weathered rock,  cut  every now  
and again by trench-like gullies that sloped steeply down to deep notches in  
the cliff-face. To find a path in  these clefts, which  were becoming deeper 
and more  frequent, Frodo  and Sam were driven to their left, well away from 
the edge, and they did not notice that for several miles they had been going 
slowly but steadily downhill: the cliff-top was sinking towards the level of 
the lowlands. 
     At last  they were brought to a  halt.  The ridge took  a  sharper bend 
nor thward and was gashed by  a deeper  ravine. On the further side it reared 
up again,  many fathoms at a single  leap: a great grey cliff  loomed before 
them, cut sheer down  as if by  a  knife stroke.  They could  go  no further 
forwards, and must turn now either west or east. But west  would  lead  them 
only  into more labour and delay, back towards the  heart of the hills; east 

####-would take them to the outer precipice. 
     `There's nothing for it but  to scramble down  this gully,  Sam,'  said 
Frodo. `Let's see what it leads to!' 
     'A nasty drop, I'll bet,' said Sam. 
     The  cleft  was  longer and deeper  than it seemed. Some way down  they 
found a  few gnarled and stunted  trees,  the first they  had seen for days: 
twisted birch for  the  most part, with here and there a fir -tree. Many were 
dead and gaunt, bitten to the core by the eastern winds. Once in milder days 
there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine, but now, after some fifty 
yards,  the  trees  came to  an end, though  old broken stumps  straggled on 
almost to the cliff's brink. The bottom of  the  gully, which  lay along the 
edge of a rock -fault, was rough with broken stone and slanted steeply  down. 
When they came at last to the end of it, Frodo stooped and leaned out. 
     `Look!' he said. `We must have come down a  long way, or else the cliff 
has sunk. It's much lower here than it was, and it looks easier too.' 
     Sam knelt beside  him  and peered  reluctantly over the  edge.  Then he 
glanced up at the great  cliff rising up, away on  their left. `Easier! ' he 
grunted. `Well, I  suppose it's always easier getting down than up. Those as 
can't fly can jump!' 
     `It would be a big jump still,' said Frodo. `About, well'  --  he  stood 
for a moment measuring it with his eyes  -- `about eighteen  fathoms I should  
guess. Not more.' 
     'And that's enough! ' said Sam. `Ugh! How I do hate looking down from a 
height! But looking's better than climbing.' 
     `All the same,' said Frodo, `I think  we could climb here; and  I think  
we shall have to try. See -- the rock is quite different from  what it was a  
few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.' 
     The outer fall  was  indeed no  longer  sheer,  but  sloped outwards  a  
little. It looked  like a great rampart or  sea -wall whose  foundations  had 
shifted, so that  its courses were all twisted and disordered, leaving great 
fissures  and  long  slanting edges that were in places  almost as  wide  as 
stairs. 
     `And if we're going to try and  get down, we had better  try  at  once. 
It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.' 
     The smoky  blur of the mountains  in the  East  was  lost  in a  deeper  
blackness that was already reaching out  westwards with long arms. There was 
a distant  mutter of  thunder borne on the rising breeze. Frodo sniffed  the 

####-air and looked up  doubtfully at the  sky. He strapped his belt  outside his 
cloak  and  tightened it, and settled  his  light pack on  his back; then he 
stepped towards the edge. `I'm going to try it,' he said. 
     `Very good! ' said Sam gloomily. `But I'm going first.' 
     'You? ' said Frodo. `What's made you change your mind about climbing?' 
     'I haven't changed my mind.  But it's only sense: put the one lowest as 
is most  likely to slip. I don't want to come down atop of you a nd knock you  
off no sense in killing two with one fall.' 
     Before Frodo  could  stop  him,  he  sat down,  swung his legs over the 
brink,  and twisted round, scrabbling with  his toes for a  foothold.  It is 
doubtful if he ever did anything braver in cold blood, or more unwise. 
     'No,  no! Sam, you  old ass! ' said Frodo.  `You'll kill  yourself  for  
certain going  over like that without  even a look to see what  to make for. 
Come back! '  He took Sam under  the armpits and hauled him up  again. 'Now,  
wait a bit and be patient! ' he said. Then he lay on the ground, leaning out 
and looking  down: but the light  seemed to be fading quickly, although  the  
sun had not yet set. 'I think we  could manage this,' he  said presently. `I  
could at any rate; and you could too. if you kept your  head and followed me  
carefully.' 
     `I don't know how you can be so sure,' said Sam. `Why! You can't see to 
the bottom in this light. What if you comes to a place where there's nowhere 
to put your feet or your hands?' 
     'Climb back, I suppose,' said Frodo. 
     'Easy said,' objected Sam. 'Better wait till morning and more light.' 
     `No! Not if I can help it,' said Frodo with a sudden strange vehemence. 
`I grudge every hour, every minute. I'm  going down to try it out.  Don't you  
follow till I come back or call!' 
     Gripping  the stony lip of  the  fall with  his fingers he  let himself 
gently down, until when his arms were almost at full stretch, his toes found 
a ledge.  'On_ e step down!  ' he  said. 'And this ledge broadens out to the 
right. I could stand there without a hold. I'll--' his words were cut short. 
     The  hurrying  darkness, now gathering  great speed, rushed up from the 
East and swallowed the sky. There was a dry splitting crack of thunder right  
overhead. Searing  lightning smote down into the hills. Then came a blast of 
savage wind, and with  it, mingling with its  roar, there came a high shrill 
shriek. The hobbits had heard just such a cry far away in the Marish as they 
fled  from Hobbiton, and even there  in the woods of the Shire it had frozen 

####-their blood.  Out  here  in the waste its terror was far greater: it pierced 
them  with cold blades of horror and despair, stopping heart and breath. Sam 
fell flat on his face. Involuntarily Frodo loosed his hold and put his hands 
over his head and ears. He swayed,  slipped,  and slithered downwards with a 
wailing cry. 
     Sam  heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. 'Master, master! 
' he called.  'Master!'.  
     He heard no answer.  He  found he was  shaking all over, but he gathered  
his breath, and once again he shouted: 'Master!' The wind seemed to blow his 
voice back into his throat, but as it passed, roaring up  the gully and away 
over the hills, a faint answering cry came to his ears:  
     'All right, all right! I'm here. But I can't see.' 
     Frodo  was  calling with a  weak voice. ,He  was not actually very  far 
away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to his feet on 
a wider ledge not  many yards lower down. Fortunately  the  rock -face at this 
point leaned well back and  the  wind had pressed him against the  cliff, so 
that he had not toppled  over. He steadied himself a little, laying his face 
against the cold stone, feeling  his heart pounding. But either the darkness 
had  grown  complete, or else  his eyes had lost  their sight. All was black  
about him. He wondered if he had been struck blind. He took a deep breath.  
     `Come  back!  Come  back! '  he heard Sam's voice out  of the blackness 
above. 
     `I can't,' he said. `I  can't see. I can't find any hold. I can't  move 
yet.' 
     `What  can  I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do?  ' shouted Sam, leaning out 
dangerously far.  Why could not his master see?  It was dim, certainly,  but 
not as dark as all that. He could see Frodo below him, a grey forlorn figure 
splayed against  the cliff. But  he was far out of the  reach of any helping 
hand. 
     There  was another crack  of  thunder;  and then  the  rain came.  In a  
blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bitter cold. 
     'I'm  coming  down to you,' shouted Sam, though how he hoped to help in 
that way he could not have said. 
     `No,  no!  wait!  ' Frodo  called back, more strongly now. `I  shall be 
better  soon. I feel  better already. Wait! You can't do anything  without a  
rope.' 
     `Rope!'  cried  Sam, talking wildly to himself  in  his  excitement and 

####-relief. `Well, if I don't deserve  to be hung on the end of one as a warning 
to numbskulls!  You're nowt  but a ninnyhammer, Sam Gamgee: that's  what 
the 
Gaffer said to me often enough, it being a word of his. Rope!' 
     `Stop  chattering!' cried  Frodo,  now  recovered  enough to feel  both 
amused and annoyed. 'Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to tell yourself 
you've got some rope in your pocket? If so, out with it! 
     `Yes, Mr. Frodo, in my pack and  all.  Carried it hundreds of miles and 
I'd clean forgotten it!' 
     `Then get busy and let an end down!' 
     Quickly  Sam  unslung  his pack and rummaged in it. There indeed at the 
bottom was a coil  of the silken-grey rope made by the folk  of  Lurien.  He 
cast an end to his master. The darkness seemed to lift from Frodo's eyes, or  
else his sight was returning. He could see the grey line as it came dangling 
down, and he thought it had a faint silver sheen. Now that he had some point  
in the darkness to  fix his eyes on, he felt less giddy. Leaning  his weight 
forward, he made the  end fast round his waist, and then he grasped the line 
with both hands.  
     Sam stepped back and braced his feet against a stump a yard or two from 
the edge.  Half hauled, half scrambling. Frodo came up  and threw himself on 
the ground. 
     Thunder growled  and  rumbled in the distance,  and the rain was  still 
falling heavily. The hobbits crawled away back into the gully; but  they did 
not find  much shelter there.  Rills of water began  to run down;  soon they 
grew to a spate that splashed and fumed on the  stones, and spouted out over  
the cliff like the gutters of a vast roof. 
     `I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,' said 
Frodo. 'What a piece of luck you had that rope!' 
     `Better  luck  if  I'd thought  of  it sooner,'  said Sam.  'Maybe  you  
remember them putting the  ropes in the boats,  as we started  off:  in  the 
elvish country. I took a fancy to it, and  I stowed a coil in my pack. Years 
ago, it seems.  "It may be a help in many needs," he said: Haldir, or one of 
those folk. And he spoke right.' 
     `A  pity I didn't think of bringing another length,' said Frodo; `but I 
left  the  Company in such a hurry and confusion. If  only  we had enough we 
could use it to get down. How long is your rope, I wonder?' 
     Sam paid it out slowly, measuring it with his arms: 'Five, ten, twenty, 

####-thirty ells, more or less,' he said. 
     'Who'd have  thought it!' Frodo exclaimed. 
     `Ah! Who would? ' said Sam. `Elves are wonderful folk. It looks  a  bit 
thin, but it's tough; and soft as milk to the  hand. Packs close too, and as 
light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!' 
     `Thirty ells! '  said Frodo considering. 'I believe it would be enough. 
If the storm passes before nightfall, I'm going to try it.' 
     `The rain's nearly  given over already,'  said Sam;  'but  don't you go 
doing anything risky in the  dim again, Mr.  Frodo! And I  haven't  got over 
that shriek on the wind yet, if you have. Like a Black Rider it  sounded-but 
one up in the air, if they can fly.  I'm  thinking we'd  best lay up in this 
crack till night's over.' 
     'And I'm  thinking that I won't spend a moment longer than I need stuck  
up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking over the marshes,' 
said Frodo. 
     With  that he stood up and went  down to the bottom of the gully again. 
He looked out.  Clear sky  was  growing in the East once more. The skirts of 
the  storm were lifting, ragged and wet, and the  main  battle had passed to 
spread its great wings over the Emyn  Muil; upon which  the dark thought  of 
Sauron brooded for a  while.  Thence it turned, smiting  the Vale of  Anduin 
with hail  and lightning,  and  casting its shadow upon  Minas  Tirith  with 
threat  of  war.  Then,  lowering in the mountains,  and gathering its great 
spires,  it rolled on slowly over Gondor  and the skirts of Rohan, until far 
away the Riders on  the plain saw its black towers mov ing behind the sun, as 
they  rode into the West. But here, over the desert and the  reeking marshes 
the  deep  blue sky of  evening  opened once  more, and  a few  pallid stars 
appeared, like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent moon. 
     `It's good  to be able to see again,' said Frodo,  breathing  deep. `Do 
you know, I thought for a  bit that I had lost my sight? From  the lightning 
or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at all, until the grey 
rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.' 
     `It does look  sort of silver in the dark,' said Sam. `Never noticed it 
before, though I can't remember as I've ever had it out since I first stowed 
it. But if you're so set on climbing, Mr. Frodo,  how  are you  going to use 
it?  Thirty ells, or  say, about eighteen fathom: that's  no  more than your 
guess at the height of the cliff.' 
     Frodo thought for a while. `Make it fast to that stump, Sam! ' he said. 

####-`Then I think  you  shall have your wish this time and go first. I'll  lower  
you, and you need do no more than use  your feet and hands  to fend yourself 
off the rock. Though, if you put your weight on  some of the ledges and give 
me a  rest, it will help. When you're down, I'll follow. I feel quite myself 
again now.' 
     'Very well,' said Sam heavily. `If it must be, let's get it  over! ' He 
took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest  to the brink; then 
the  other  end  he tied about  his own waist.  Reluctantly  he  turned  and 
prepared to go over the edge a second time. 
     It did not, however, turn  out half as bad as he had expected. The rope 
seemed  to give him confidence, though he  shut his eyes more than once when 
he looked down between his feet. There was one awkward spot, where there 
was 
no ledge and the wa ll was sheer and even undercut for  a short  space; there 
he slipped and  swung  out on the silver  line. But Frodo lowered him slowly 
and steadily, and  it was over at  last. His  chief  fear had been  that the 
rope-length would give out while he was still high up, but there was still a  
good bight in Frodo's hands, when Sam came to the bottom and called up: `I'm 
down! ' His voice came up clearly from below,  but Frodo could not see  him; 
his grey elven-cloak had melted into the twilight. 
     Frodo took rather  more time to follow him. He had the  rope  about his 
waist and  it was fast above, and he had shortened it so that it  would pull 
him up before  he  reached the ground; still he did not want to risk a fall, 
and he had not quite  Sam's faith in  this   slender grey line.  He found two 
places, all  the  same,  where he had to trust wholly to it: smooth surfaces 
where there was no hold even  for  his strong hobbit  fingers and the ledges 
were far apart. But at last he too was down. 
     `Well!' he cried.  `We've done it! We've escaped from the Emyn Muil! And 
now what next, I  wonder? Maybe we shall soon  be sighing for good hard rock  
under foot again.' 
     But   Sam  did   not  answer:  he  was   staring  back  up  the  cliff.  
`Ninnyhammers!  ' he said. `Noodles! My beautiful rope! There it is tied to a  
stump,  and  we're  at the  bottom.  Just  as  nice a little stair for  that 
slinking Gollum as we could leave. Better put up a signpost to say which way 
we've gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.' 
     `If you can think of any way  we could have both used the rope and  yet 
brought  it down with  us, then you  can  pass on to me ninnyhammer, or  any 

####-other name your Gaffer gave you,' said Frodo. `Climb up and untie it and let  
yourself down, if you want to! ' 
     Sam scratched his head. `No,  I can't think how, begging  your pardon,' 
he  said. `But I don't like leaving it, and that's  a fact.' He  stroked the 
rope's  end  and  shook  it  gently.  `It goes  hard parting with anything I 
brought  out  of  the  Elf-country. Made  by Galadriel herself, too,  maybe. 
Galadriel,' he murmured  nodding his head  mournfully. He looked up and gave 
one last pull to the rope as if in farewell. 
     To  the  complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam  fell 
over, and the long grey coils slithered silently down  on top  of him. Frodo 
laughed. `Who  tied the rope? ' he said. `A good thing it held as long as it 
did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!' 
     Sam did not laugh. `I may not be much good at climbing, Mr.  Frodo,' he 
said in injured tones, `but I do know something  about rope and about knots.  
It's in the family, as you might  say. Why, my grand-dad, and my  uncle Andy 
after him, him that  was the Gaffer's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over 
by Tighfield many a year.  And I put as fast a hitch  over the  stump as any 
one could have done, in the Shire or out of it.' 
     `Then the rope must have broken  -- frayed on the rock -edge, I expect,' 
said Frodo. 
     `I bet it didn't! ' said Sam in an  even more injured voice. He stooped 
and examined the ends. `Nor it hasn't neither. Not a strand!' 
     'Then I'm afraid it must have been the knot,' said Frodo. 
     Sam shook his  head and did not answer. He was passing the rope through 
his  fingers  thoughtfully. `Have it  your own way, Mr.  Frodo,' he  said at 
last, `but I think the  rope came off itself  -- when I called.' He coiled it 
up and stowed it lovingly in his pack. 
     'It certainly came,' said Frodo, `and that's the  chief thing.  But now 
we've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful 
the stars are, and the Moon!' 
     'They do cheer  the heart, don't they?  ' said Sam looking up.  'Elvish 
they  are. somehow. And the Moon's growing. We haven't  seen him for a night 
or two in this cloudy weather. He's beginning to give quite a light.' 
     'Yes,' said Frodo; `but he  won't be full for some  days. I don't think  
we'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.' 
     Under the first shadows of night they started  out on the next stage of 
their journey. After  a while Sam turned and looked back at the way they had 

####-come. The mouth  of the gully was a black notch in the  dim cliff. `I'm glad 
we've got  the rope,' he said. 'We've set a little puzzle for  that footpad, 
anyhow. He can try his nasty flappy feet on those ledges!' 
     They  picked  their  steps away from the  skirts of the cliff,  among a  
wilderness of boulders  and  rough stones, wet  and slippery with the  heavy  
rain.  The ground still fell  away  sharply. They had not gone very far when 
they came upon a great fissure that yawned suddenly black before their feet. 
It was not wide,  but it was too wide to  jump across in the dim light. They 
thought they  could hear water  gurgling in  its  depths. It curved  away  on 
their  left  northward, back  towards the hills. and so barred their road in 
that direction, at any rate while darkness lasted. 
     'We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I 
think,'  said  Sam.  `We might  find some  nook  there, or  even  a cave  or  
something.' 
     'I  suppose so,'  said  Frodo.  'I'm tired.  and  I don't  think I  can 
scramble among stones much  longer tonight --  though  I grudge the delay. I 
wish there was a clear path in front of us: then I'd go on till my legs gave 
way.' 
     They did not find the going  any easier at the  broken feet of the Emyn 
Muil. Nor did Sam find any nook  or hollow  to shelter in: only  bare  stony 
slopes frowned  over  by the  cliff, which  now rose again, higher  and more 
sheer as they went back. In the end, worn out, they  just cast themselves on 
the ground  under the lee  of a boulder lying not far  from the foot of  the 
precipice. There  for some time  they sat huddled mournfully together in the 
cold stony night, while sleep crept  upon them in spite of all they could do 
to hold it off.  The moon now rode high and  clear. Its thin white light lit 
up the faces of the rocks and drenched the cold frowning walls of the cliff, 
turning  all the wide  looming darkness into a   chill  pale grey scored with 
black shadows. 
     'Well! '  said  Frodo, standing up and drawing  his cloak more  closely 
round him.  `You  sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket.  I'll walk up and 
down on sentry for a while.' Suddenly he stiffened,  and stooping he gripped  
Sam by the  arm. `What's  that?  '  he whispered. `Look  over  there on  the 
cliff!' 
     Sam looked and breathed in  sharply through his teeth. `Ssss!' he said. 
'That's what it is. It's that Gollum! Snakes and adders! And to think tha t I 
thought that  we'd puzzle him with our bit of a climb! Look at  him!  Like a  

####-nasty crawling spider on a wall.' 
     Down the face of a precipice, sheer  and almost smooth it seemed in the 
pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thin  limbs  splayed 
out. Maybe its soft clinging  hands and toes were finding crevices and holds 
that no hobbit could ever have seen or used, but it looked as if it was just  
creeping down on sticky pads, like some large prowling thing of insect-kind.  
And it was coming down  head  first, as  if it was smelling its way. Now and 
again it lifted its head slowly, turning  it  right back on  its long skinny 
neck, and the hobbits  caught  a glimpse of two small pale gleaming  lights,  
its eyes that blinked at the moon  for a moment and then were quickly lidded  
again. 
     `Do you think he can see us? ' said Sam. 
     `I don't know,' said Frodo  quietly, `but I think not. It  is hard even 
for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot  see you in the shadow 
even at a  few paces. And I've heard that he doesn't like Sun or Moon.' 
     `Then why is he coming down just here? ' asked Sam. 
     'Quietly, Sam! ' said Frodo. `He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear 
as keen as  Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something  now: our voices 
probably. We did a lot of shouting  away back there; and we were talking far 
too loudly until a minute ago.' 
     `Well, I'm sick of him,' said Sam. `He's come once too often for me and 
I'm going to have a word with him, if I can. I don't suppose  we  could give 
him the slip  now anyway.' Drawing his grey  hood well  over  his  face, Sam 
crept stealthily towards the cliff.  
     `Careful!' whispered Frodo coming behind.  `Don't  alarm him! He's much 
more dangerous than he looks.' 
     The black crawling shape was now three-quarters  of  the way down,  and 
perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliff's  foot. Crouching stone-still in 
the shadow of a large  boulder the hobbits watched him.  He seemed  to  have 
come  to a  difficult passage or  to be troubled about something. They could  
hear him snuffling, and now and again there was a harsh  hiss of breath that 
sounded like  a curse. He lifted his head, and they  thought  they heard him 
spit. Then  he  moved on again. Now they could hear  his voice creaking  and 
whistling. 
     `Ach,  sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste  less speed.  We musstn't 
rissk our neck, musst we, precious? No, precious  -- gollum!'  He lifted his 
head again, blinked at the moon, and quickly shut his eyes. `We hate it,' he 

####-hissed.  `Nassty,  nassty shivery light it is  -- sss  --  it  spies on  us,  
precious -- it hurts our eyes.' 
     He was getting  lower now and the  hisses became  sharper  and clearer. 
'Where iss it, where iss it: my Precious, my Precious? It's ours, it is, and 
we wants it. The thieves, the thieves, the filthy  little thieves. Where are 
they with my Precious? Curse them! We hates them.' 
     `It doesn't sound as if he knew we were here, does it? ' whispered Sam. 
`And what's his Precious? Does he mean the' 
     `Hsh!  ' breathed  Frodo. 'He's getting near now, near enough to hear a  
whisper.' 
     Indeed Gollum  had suddenly paused again,  and his  large  head on  its 
scrawny neck was  lolling from side to side as if he was listening. His pale 
eyes were  half  unlidded. Sam restrained  himself, though his fingers  were 
twitching. His  eyes,  filled with anger  and  disgust,  were  fixed  on the 
wretched  creature as  he  now  began  to  move again,  still whispering and 
hissing to himself.  
     At last he wa s no more than a  dozen  feet from the ground, right above 
their  heads. From that  point  there  was a sheer  drop, for  the cliff was 
slightly undercut,  and  even Gollum could not find a hold of any  kind.  He 
seemed to be trying to twist round, so  as to go legs  first, when  suddenly 
with a shrill whistling shriek he fell. As he did so, he curled his legs and 
arms up round him, like a spider whose descending thread is snapped. 
     Sam was out of his hiding in a flash and crossed the  space between him 
and the cliff foot in  a couple of leaps. Before Gollum could get up, he was 
on top of him.  But he  found Gollum more than he bargained for, even  taken 
like that,  suddenly, off  his guard after  a  fall. Before Sam  could get a  
hold, long legs  and arms  were  wound round  him  pinning  his  arms, and a  
clinging grip, soft  but  horribly  strong, was  squeezing  him  like slowly  
tightening  cords;  clammy fingers were feeling for  his throat.  Then sharp 
teeth bit into his shoulder. All he could do was to butt his hard round head 
sideways into  the creature's face. Gollum hissed and spat, but  he did  not 
let go. 
     Things  would have gone  ill with  Sam, if he had been alone. But Frodo 
sprang  up, and drew  Sting from its sheath. With his left hand he drew back  
Gollum's head by his thin lank hair, stretching  his long neck, and  forcing 
his pale venomous eyes to stare up at the sky. 
     `Let go! Gollum,' he said. `This is Sting. You have seen it before once 

####-upon a time. Let go, or you'll feel it this time! I'll cut your throat.' 
     Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string. Sam got up, fingering 
his  shoulder.  His eyes  smouldered  with  anger, but  he could  not avenge 
himself: his miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones whimpering. 
     `Don't hurt  us! Don't let them hurt us,  precious! They won't hurt  us 
will they, nice little hobbitses?  We didn't mean no harm, but they jumps on 
us like cats on poor mices, they did, precious. And we're so lonely, gollum. 
We'll be nice to them, very nice, if they'll be  nice to  us, won't we, yes, 
yess.' 
     `Well, what's to be done with it? '  said  Sam.  `Tie  it up, so  as it 
can't come sneaking after us no more, I say.' 
     `But  that would kill  us, kill  us,'  whimpered  Gollum. `Cruel little 
hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands  and leave us,  gollum, gollum. ' 
Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat. 
     `No,'  said Frodo. `If we kill him, we  must kill him outright. But  we 
can't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.' 
     `Oh hasn't  he! ' said Sam rubbing his  shoulder.  `Anyway he meant to, 
and he means to, I'll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, that's his plan.' 
     'I daresay,' said Frodo. `But what he means  to  do is another matter.' 
He paused for  a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but stopped whimpering. 
Sam stood glowering over him. 
     It seemed  to Frodo  then  that he  heard,  quite  plainly but far off,  
voices out of the past: 
     What a pity Bilbo did not stub the vile creature, when he had a chance! 
     Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and  Mercy: not to strike 
without need. 
     I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death. 
     Deserves  death! I daresay  he does. Many that live  deserve death. And 
some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too eager 
to  deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety. Even 
the wise cannot see all ends. 
     `Very well,' he answered aloud, lowering  his  sword. 'But  still  I am 
afraid. And yet, as you see,  I will not touch  the creature. For now that I 
see him, I do pity him.' 
     Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one who was 
not there. Gollum lifted his head. 
     'Yess,  wretched we are,  precious,' he whined. 'Misery misery! Hobbits 

####-won't kill us, nice hobbits.' 
     'No,  we won't,'  said Frodo. `But we won't  let you go, either. You're 
full  of  wickedness and  mischief, Gollum. You will  have to come with  us,  
that's all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must help us, if  you  can. 
One good turn deserves another.' 
     'Yess, yes indeed,' said Gollum sitting up. 'Nice hobbits! We will come 
with them. Find them safe paths in the dark, yes we will. And where are they 
going in these cold hard  lands, we  wonders, yes we wonders? ' He looked up 
at them, and a faint  light of cunning  and eagerness flickered for a second 
in his pale blinking eyes. 
     Sam scowled at him,  and sucked his  teeth; but he seemed to sense that 
there was  something  odd  about his master's  mood and that the  matter was 
beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo's reply. 
     Frodo  looked straight into Gollum's eyes  which  flinched  and twisted 
away. `You know that, or  you guess  well enough, Smjagol,' he said. quietly 
and sternly. `We are going to Mordor, of course. And you know the way there, 
I believe.' 
     `Ach! sss! ' said Gollum, covering his  ears with his hands, as if such 
frankness, and the open speaking of the names, hurt him. `We guessed, yes we 
guessed,' he  whispered;  `and we didn't  want  them  to  go,  did  we?  No, 
precious, not the nice hobbits. Ashes, ashes, and dust, and thirst there is;  
and pits, pits, pits, and Orcs, thousands of Orcses. Nice hobbits mustn't go 
to -- sss  -- those places.' 
     `So you have been there?  ' Frodo insisted. `And you're being drawn back  
there, aren't you?' 
     `Yess. Yess. No! ' shrieked Gollum. `Once, by  accident it  was, wasn't  
it, precious? Yes, by accident. But we won't go back, no, no!' Then suddenly  
his voice and language changed,  and he sobbed in his throat,  and spoke but 
not to them. `Leave me alone, gollum! You hurt me.  O my poor hands, gollum! 
I,  we, I don't want  to come back. I can't find it. I am tired. I, we can't  
find it, gollum, gollum,  no, nowhere. They 're always awake.  Dwarves,  Men, 
and Elves, terrible Elves  with  bright eyes. I can't find it. Ach! ' He got 
up and clenched his long hand into a bony fleshless knot, shaking it towards 
the East. 'We  won't! ' he  cried. 'Not for  you.' Then he collapsed   again. 
'Gollum, gollum,' he whimpered with his face  to the  ground. 'Don't look at 
us! Go away! Go to sleep!' 
     `He will not go  away or go to sleep at  your  command, Smjagol,'  said 

####-Frodo. `But if you  really wish to be free of  him again. then you  must help 
me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go 
all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.' 
     Gollum sat up  again  and looked at him under  his eyelids. 'He's  over  
there,' he cackled. `Always there. Orcs  wi ll take you all the  way. Easy to 
find Orcs east of  the River. Don't ask Smjagol. Poor, poor Smjagol, he went  
away long ago. They took his Precious, and he's lost now.' 
     `Perhaps we'll find him again, if you come with us,' said Frodo. 
     'No, no, never! He's lost his Precious,' said Gollum. 
     'Get up! ' said Frodo. 
     Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff. 
     `Now! '  said Frodo. 'Can  you find  a path easier by day or by  night?  
We're tired; but if you choose the night, we'll star t tonight.' 
     `The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,' Gollum whined. `Not  under the 
White  Face, not  yet. It will go behind  the  hills soon, yess. Rest  a bit 
first, nice hobbits!' 
     `Then sit down,' said Frodo, `and don't move!' 
     The  hobbits  seated themselves  beside  him, one on  either side. with 
their backs to the stony wall, resting their legs. There was no need for any 
arrangement by word: they knew that they must not sleep for a moment. Slowly 
the moon went by. Shadows fell down from the hills, and all grew dark before 
them. The stars grew thick  and bright in  the sky  above.  No one  stirred. 
Gollum  sat  with his legs drawn up, knees  under chin, flat hands  and feet 
splayed on the ground,  his eyes closed; but he seemed tense, as if thinking 
or listening. 
     Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and  they  understood.  They 
relaxed,  leaning  their heads back, and  shutting their eyes or seeming to. 
Soon  the sound of  their  soft  breathing  could be  heard. Gollum's  hands 
twitched  a little. Hardly perceptibly his head moved  to  the left  and the 
right, and  first one eye and then the other opened a slit. The hobbits made 
no sign. 
     Suddenly,  with startling agility and  speed, straight  off  the ground 
with a jump like a  grasshopper or a frog. Gollum  bounded  forward into the  
darkness. But that was just what Frodo and Sam had expected.  Sam was on 
him 
before he had gone two paces after  his spring. Frodo coming behind  grabbed 
his leg and threw him. 

####-     'Your rope might prove useful again, Sam.' he said. 
     Sam  got  out the  rope. 'And  where were you  off  to in the cold hard 
lands, Mr. Gollum?' he growled. 'We wonders.  aye,  we wonders. To find 
some 
of  your orc-friends,  I warrant. You nasty treacherous creature. It's round 
your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.' 
     Gollum lay quiet and tried  no further tricks.  He did not  answer Sam, 
but gave him a swift venomous look. 
     `All we need is something to keep a hold on him,' said Frodo. 'We  want 
him  to walk, so it's  no good  tying his legs-or his arms. he seems to  use 
them nearly as much. Tie one end to his  ankle, and keep a grip on the other  
end.' 
     He  stood over Gollum, while Sam  tied the  knot. The  result surprised 
them both. Gollum  began to scream, a thin, tearing sound, very  horrible to 
hear. He writhed, and tried to get his mouth to his ankle and bite the rope.  
He kept on screaming. 
     At last Frodo was  convinced that  he really was  in pain; but it could 
not be from the knot. He examined it  and found that  it was not too  tight, 
indeed  hardly  tight  enough. Sam was gentler than his words.  'What's  the 
matter with you? ' he said. `If you will try to run away. you must  be tied;  
but we don't wish to hurt you.' 
     'It hurts us, it hurts us,' hissed Gollum. `It freezes, it bites! Elves 
twisted it,  curse them! Nasty cruel hobbits! That's why we tries to escape, 
of course  it is, precious.  We guessed they were cruel hobbits. They visits 
Elves, fierce Elves with bright eyes. Take it off us! It hurts us.' 
     `No, I will not take it off you,' said Frodo, `not unless' -- he paused 
a  moment in thought -- `not unless there is any promise you can make that I  
can trust.' 
     'We  will swear to  do what he wants,  yes, yess,  said  Gollum,  still 
twisting and grabbling at his ankle. `It hurts us.' 
     `Swear? ' said Frodo. 
     'Smjagol,' said  Gollum suddenly and clearly, opening his eyes wide and 
staring at Frodo with a strange light. 'Smjagol will swear on the Precious.' 
     Frodo drew himself up, and again  Sam was startled by his words and his 
stern voice. 'On the Precious? How dare you? ' he said. 'Think! 
     One Ring to rule them all and in the Darkness bind them. 
     Would you  commit your promise to that, Smjagol? It  will hold you. But 

####-it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words. Beware!' 
     Gollum cowered. 'On the Precious. on the Precious! ' he repeated. 
     `And what would you swear? ' asked Frodo. 
     `To be very very good,' said Gollum.  Then crawling to Frodo's  feet he 
grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran over him, as if the 
words shook his very  bones with fear. 'Smjagol will swear never,  never, to 
let Him  have  it.  Never! Smjagol will save  it. But  he  must swear on the 
Precious.' 
     'No! not on it,' said Frodo, looking  down at him with stern pity. 'All 
you wish is  to see it and touch it, if  you can,  though you know  it would 
drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it,  if you  will. For you know  where it 
is. Yes,  you know, Smjagol. It is before you.' 
     For  a moment it appeared to Sam that  his master had  grown and Gollum 
had shrunk: a  tall stern shadow, a mighty lord  who hid  his  brightness in 
grey cloud, and at his feet  a little whining  dog. Yet the two were in some 
way akin and not alien: they could reach one another's  minds. Gollum raised 
himself and began pawing at Frodo, fawning at his knees. 
     'Down! down! ' said Frodo. `Now speak your promise!' 
     `We promises, yes I promise!' said Gollum. 'I  will serve the  master of 
the Precious. Good master, good Smjagol, gollum, gollum!' Suddenly he  began 
to weep and bite at his ankle again. 
     'Take the rope off, Sam!' said Frodo. 
     Reluctantly Sam obeyed. At once Gollum got up and began prancing about, 
like a whipped cur  whose master  has patted it. From  that moment a change, 
which lasted for some time,  came over him. He spoke  with less  hissing and 
whining, and he spoke to his companions direct, not to his precious self. He 
would  cringe and  flinch,  if  they stepped  near  him or  made any  sudden 
movement,  and  he  avoided  the  touch of  their elven-cloaks; but  he  was 
friendly,  and  indeed pitifully anxious  to  please.  He would cackle  with 
laughter and caper, if any jest was made, or even  if Frodo  spoke kindly to 
him, and weep if Frodo rebuked  him. Sam said little to  him of any sort. He 
suspected him more  deeply than ever,  and if possible liked the new Gollum, 
the Smjagol, less than the old. 
     'Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we're to call you,' he  said. 'now for 
it! The Moon's gone. and the night's going. We'd better start.' 
     'Yes, yes,' agreed Gollum, skipping about. 'Off we go! There's only one 
way across between the North-end and the South-end. I found it, I  did. Orcs 

####-don't use it,  Orcs  don't know  it.  Orcs don't cross the  Marshes, they go 
round for miles and  miles. Very  lucky  you  came  this way. Very lucky you 
found Smjagol, yes. Follow Smjagol!' 
     He took  a few  steps away  and  looked  back  inquiringly,  like a dog 
inviting  them for  a  walk. 'Wait a bit, Gollum!'  cried Sam. `Not too  far 
ahead now! I'm going to be at your tail, and I've got the rope handy.' 
     'No, no! ' said Gollum. 'Smjagol promised.' 
     In the  deep of night under hard  clear stars they set  off. Gollum led 
them back northward for a while along the way they had come; then he slanted 
to  the right away from  the steep edge  of the Emyn Muil,  down  the broken 
stony slopes towards the vast fens below. They faded swiftly and softly into  
the darkness. Over all the leagues of waste before the gates of Mordor there 
was a black silence. 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Passage of the Marshes 

 
 
     Gollum moved  quickly,  with his  head and  neck  thrust forward, often 
using  his hands as well as his  feet. Frodo  and  Sam were hard put to it to 
keep up with  him; but he seemed  no longer to have any thought of escaping, 
and if they fell  behind, he  would turn and wait for  them. After a time he 
brought  them to the brink of the narrow gully that they   had struck before; 
but they were now further from the hills. 
     `Here it  is!'  he cried.  'There is  a  way down inside, yes.  Now  we 
follows it  -- out,  out away over there.' He pointed south and east  towards 
the marshes. The reek of them came to their nostrils, heavy and foul even in 
the cool night air. . 
     Gollum  cast up and down along the  brink,  and at length he  called to 
them.  `Here! We can get down here. Smjagol went  this way once: I went this 
way, hiding from Orcs.' 
     He led the way, and following him  the  hobbits climbed  down into  the 
gloom. It  was  not difficult,  for  the  rift was at this  point only  some 
fifteen feet deep and about  a dozen across. There  was running water at the 
bottom: it was in fact the bed of one of the many small rivers that trickled 
down  from the  hills to feed  the  stagnant pools and mires beyond.  Gollum 
turned to the  right, southward  more  or less, and splashed  along with his 
feet in the  shallow  stony stream. He seemed greatly  delighted to feel the 
water, and chuckled to himself, sometimes even croaking in a sort of song. 
     The cold hard lands, 
     they bites our hands, 
     they gnaws our feet. 
     The rocks and stones 
     are like old bones 
     all bare of meat. 
     But stream and pool 
     is wet and cool: 
     so nice for feet! 
     And now we wish -- 
     'Ha! ha! What does we wish?' he said,  looking sidelong at the hobbits.  
'We'll tell you.' he croaked. `He  guessed it long ago, Baggins guessed it.' 
A glint  came  into his  eyes, and Sam  catching the gleam in  the  darkness 

####-thought it far from pleasant. 
     Alive without breath; 
     as cold as death; 
     never thirsting, ever drinking; 
     clad in mail, never clinking. 
     Drowns on dry land, 
     thinks an island 
     is a  mountain; 
     thinks a fountain  
     is a puff of air. 
     So sleek, so fair! 
     What a joy to meet! 
     We only wish 
     to catch a fish, 
     so juicy-sweet! 
     These  words only made  more pressing to Sam's mind a problem that  had 
been  troubl ing him  from the moment when he  understood that hir master was 
going  to adopt Gollum as a guide: the problem of food. It  did not occur to 
him that his master might also  have thought of  it. hut he  supposed Gollum 
had.  Indeed how had Gollum kept  himself  in all his lonely wandering? 'Not 
too well,'  thought Sam. 'He looks fair famished. Not too dainty to try what 
hobbit tastes like  if there ain't  no  fish, I'll wager -- supposing  as he 
could catch us napping. Well, he won't: not Sam Gamgee for one. ' 
     They stumbled along in the dark winding gully for a long time, or so it 
seemed to the tired feet of Frodo and Sam. The gully turned eastward, and as 
they went on it broadened and got gradually shallower. At last the sky above  
grew faint with the  first  grey  of morning. Gollum  had shown  no signs of 
tiring, but now he looked up and halted. 
     `Day  is near,'  he whispered,  as  if  Day  was  something  that might 
overhear  him and spring on  him. `Smjagol will stay here: I will stay here, 
and the Yellow Face won't see me.' 
     `We should be glad to see the Sun;' said Frodo, `but we will stay here: 
we are too tired to go any further at present.' 
     `You are not  wise  to  be glad of the  Yellow Face,' said  Gollum. `It 
shows you up. Nice sensible hobbits stay with Smjagol. Orcs and nasty things 
are about. They can see a long way. Stay and hide with me! ' 
     The three of them settled down to rest at the foot of the rocky wall of 

####-the gully.  It was not much more than a  tall man's  height now,  and at its 
base there were wide flat shelves  of dry stone; the water ran in a  channel 
on  the  other side. Frodo and Sam sat  on one of  the  flats, resting their 
backs. Gollum paddled and scrabbled in the stream. 
     `We must  take a little food,' said Frodo. `Are you hungry, Smjagol? We 
have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.' 
     At the word hungry a greenish light  was kindled in Gollum's pale eyes,  
and they seemed to protrude further than ever from his thin sickly face. For  
a  moment  he  relapsed into his old  Gollum-manner. 'We are famisshed,  yes 
famisshed we are. precious,' he  said. `What is it they eats? Have they nice 
fisshes? ' His tongue lolled out between his sharp yellow teeth. licking his 
colourless lips.  
     `No, we have  got no fish,' said Frodo. `We have only  got this'  -- he 
held up a wafer of lembas -- 'and water, if the water here is fit to drink.' 
     `Yess,  yess,  nice water,' said  Gollum. `Drink it, drink it, while we 
can! But what is it they've got, pr ecious? Is it crunchable? Is it tasty? ' 
     Frodo  broke  off a portion  of a wafer  and handed it  to him  on  its 
leaf-wrapping. Gollum  sniffed at the leaf and  his face changed: a spasm of 
disgust came over it, and a hint of his old malice. `Smjagol smells it! ' he 
said. `Leaves out of the elf-country,  gah! They stinks. He climbed in those 
trees,  and  he  couldn't  wash  the  smell  off  his hands, my nice hands.' 
Dropping the leaf, he took a corner of the   lembas  and nibbled it. He spat, 
and a fit  of coughing shook him. 
     `Ach! No!  '  he spluttered. `You try to  choke poor Smjagol.  Dust and 
ashes, he can't eat that. He must  starve. But  Smjagol  doesn't  mind. Nice 
hobbits! Smjagol has promised.  He will  starve. He can't eat hobbits' food. 
He will starve. Poor thin Smjagol! ' 
     `I'm sorry,' said Frodo; `but I can't help  you, I'm  afraid.  I  think  
this  food would do you good, if  you would try. But perhaps  you can't even  
try, not yet anyway.' 
     The hobbits munched their  lembas in silence. Sam thought that it tasted 
far better, somehow, than  it had for a  good while: Gollum's behaviour  had 
made him  attend to its flavour  again.  But  he did  not  feel comfortable. 
Gollum  watched every morsel from  hand to mouth, like an expectant dog by a  
diner's  chair. Only  when they had finished and were preparing to rest, was 
he apparently convinced that they had no hidden dainties that he could share 
in. Then he went and sat by himself a few paces away and whimpered a little. 

####-     'Look here!  ' Sam whispered to Frodo, not too softly: he did not really 
care whether Gollum heard him or  not. `We've got to get some sleep; but not 
both together with that hungry villain nigh, promise or no  promise. Smjagol 
or Gollum,  he won't change  his habits in a hurry, I'll warrant. You  go to 
sleep, Mr. Frodo, and I'll call you when I can't keep my eyelids propped up. 
Turn and about, same as before, while he's loose.' 
     'Perhaps you're right, Sam,'  said Frodo  speaking openly. 'There is  a 
change  in him, but  just what kind of a change  and  how deep, I'm not sure 
yet.  Seriously though,  I  don't think  there is any  need  for fear --  at 
present.  Still watch if you wish.  Give me about  two hours, not more,  and 
then call me.' 
     So  tired was Frodo that his head  fell forward  on his  breast  and he 
slept. almost as soon as he had spoken the words. Gollum seemed no longer to 
have any fears. He curled  up and  went quickly to sleep, quite unconcerned. 
Presently his breath was hissing softly through his clenched  teeth,  hut he 
lay still as stone.  After a while, fearing that he would  drop off himself, 
if he sat listening  to his two companions breathing, Sam  got up and gently 
prodded  Gollum.  His  hands  uncurled  and  twitched, but he made  no other 
movement.  Sam bent  down and said  fissh close to his ear, but there was  no 
response, not even a catch in Gollum's breathing. 
     Sam scratched his head. `Must really be asleep,' he muttered. `And if I 
was  like Gollum,  he wouldn't  wake up  never  aga in.'  He  restrained  the 
thoughts of his sword and the rope that sprang to his mind, and went and sat 
down by his master. 
     When he woke up the sky above was dim, not lighter but darker than when 
they had breakfasted. Sam leapt to his feet. Not least from  his own feeling 
of  vigour and hunger, he suddenly understood that he had slept the daylight  
away,  nine hours at least. Frodo was still fast asleep, lying now stretched 
on  his  side. Gollum  was  not to be seen. Various  reproachful  names  for  
himself  came  to  Sam's  mind,  drawn  from  the  Gaffer's  large  paternal 
word-hoard; then  it  also occurred to him that his  master had been  right:  
there  had  for the present been nothing  to guard against. They were at any 
rate both alive and unthrottled. 
     'Poor wretch! ' he said half remorsefully. 'Now I wonder where he's got 
to?  ' 
     'Not far, not far! ' said a  voice  above him. He looked up and saw the 
shape of Gollum's large head and ears against the evening sky. 

####-     'Here, what are  you doing? ' cried Sam, his suspicions coming back  as 
soon as he saw that shape. 
     `Smjagol is hungry,' said Gollum. `Be back soon.' 
     'Come back now!' shouted Sam. 'Hi! Come back!' But Gollum had vanished. 
     Frodo  woke  at  the sound of Sam's shout and sat up, rubbing his eyes. 
'Hullo!' he said. 'Anything wrong? What's the time?' 
     'I dunno,' said Sam. 'After sundown, I  reckon. And he's gone off. Says 
he's hungry.' 
     `Don't worry!'  said Frodo. `There's  no help  for it. But  he'll  come 
back, you'll see. The promise will hold  yet a while. And he won't leave his 
Precious, anyway.' 
     Frodo made  light of it when he learned that they had slept soundly for 
hours with Gollum, and a very  hungry Gollum too, loose beside  them. `Don't  
think of any of your  Gaffer's hard names,' he said. 'You were worn out, and 
it has  turned out well: we are now  both rested. And  we  have a hard  road 
ahead, the worst road of all.' 
     `About the  food,' said Sam. 'How long's it going to take us to do this 
job? And  when it's done, what are we  going to do then? This waybread keeps 
you on  your legs in a wonderful way, though  it doesn't satisfy the innards 
proper, as you might say: not to my feeling anyhow, meaning no disrespect to 
them  as made it.  But you have  to eat some of it every day, and it doesn't  
grow. I  reckon we've got  enough to last, say,  three weeks or so, and that 
with a tight belt and a light tooth, mind you. We've been a bit free with it 
so far.' 
     `I  don't know how long we shall take to -- to finish,' said Frodo. `We 
were miserably delayed  in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee,  my dear hobbit  -- 
indeed, Sam my dearest  hobbit, friend of friends  --  I do not think we need 
give thought  to what comes after that. To  do the job as you put it  -- what 
hope is  there that we ever shall? And if we do, who knows what will come of 
that? If the One goes into the Fire, and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are 
we ever likely to need bread again? I think not. If  we can nurse  our limbs 
to bring  us to Mount Doom, that is  all we can do. More than I can, I begin 
to feel.' 
     Sam nodded silently. He took his master's hand and bent over it. He did 
not kiss it,  though his  tears fell on it. Then  he turned away,  drew  his 
sleeve  over his nose, and got up, a nd stamped about, trying to whistle, and 
saying between the efforts: 'Where's that dratted creature?' 

####-     It was actually not long before Gollum returned; but he came so quietly 
that they did not hear him till  he stood before them. His  fingers and face 
were soiled with black mud. He was still chewing  and slavering. What he was 
chewing, they did not ask or like to think. 
     'Worms  or beetles or something slimy out of holes,' thought Sam. 'Brr! 
The nasty creature; the poor wretch! ' 
     Gollum  said  nothing to  them,  until he had  drunk deeply  and washed 
himself in the  stream. Then he  came up to them, licking  his lips. 'Better 
now,' he said. `Are we  rested? Ready to  go  on? Nice  hobbits,  they sleep 
beautifully. Trust Smjagol now? Very, very good.' 
     The next stage of their journey was much the same as the  last. As they 
went  on the gully became ever shallower and  the slope  of its  floor  more 
gradual. Its  bottom  was less stony and  more earthy, and slowly its  sides 
dwindled to mere ba nks. It began  to wind and wander. That night drew to its 
end, but clouds were now over moon and star, and they  knew of the coming of 
day only by the slow spreading of the thin grey light. 
     In  a chill hour they came  to the end of  the water-course. The  banks 
became moss-grown mounds. Over the  last shelf of rotting  stone the  stream 
gurgled  and fell  down into a brown bog and was lost. Dry  reeds hissed and  
rattled though they could feel no wind. 
     On either  side and in front wide  fens and  m ires now lay,  stretching 
away southward and eastward into the dim half-light. Mists curled and smoked 
from dark and noisome pools. The reek of  them hung  stifling  in the  still 
air.  Far away, now almost  due  south, the mountain-walls of Mordor loomed, 
like a black bar of rugged clouds floating above a dangerous fog-bound sea. 
     The hobbits were now wholly in the hands of  Gollum. They did now know,  
and  could not guess in that misty light. that they  were in  fact only just  
within the northern  borders of the marshes. the  main expanse of  which lay 
south of them. They could, if they had known the lands, with some delay have 
retraced their steps  a little, and then turning east have come  round  over  
hard roads  to the bare plain of Dagorlad: the field of  the  ancient battle 
before  the gates of Mordor. Not that there was great hope in such a course. 
On that stony  plain  there was no cover,  and across it ran the highways of 
the Orcs and the soldiers of the Enemy. Not even the cloaks of  Lurien would 
have concealed them there. 
     'How do we shape our course now, Smjagol? ' asked Frodo. 'Must we cross 
these evil-smelling fens?  ' 

####-     `No need,  no  need at all,' said Gollum. 'Not if hobbits want to reach 
the dark mountains and go to see Him very quick.  Back a little, and round a  
little' -- his skinny arm waved north and  east -- `and you can come on hard 
cold roads to the  very gates of  His country.  Lots  of  His people will be 
there looking out for guests, very pleased to  take them straight  to Him, O 
yes. His Eye watches  that way all the  time. It caught  Smjagol there, long 
ago.' Gollum shuddered. 'But Smjagol has used his eyes since then, yes, yes:  
I've used  eyes  and feet  and  nose since then. l  know  other  ways.  More 
difficult, not so quick; but  better, if  we  don't want  Him to see. Follow 
Smjagol! He can take you through  the marshes, through the mists. nice thick 
mists. Follow  Smjagol very carefully, and you  may go  a long  way. quite a  
long way, before He catches you, yes perhaps. ' 
     It was already day, a windless and sullen morning, and the  marsh-reeks 
lay in heavy banks. No sun pierced the low  clouded  sky, and Gollum  seemed 
anxious to continue the journey at once. So after a brief  rest they set out 
again and were soon lost in a shadowy silent world, cut off from all view of 
the lands about, either the hills  that they  had left or the mountains that 
they sought. They went slowly in single file: Gollum, Sam, Frodo. 
     Frodo seemed the most weary of the three, and slow though they went. he 
often lagged. The hobbits soon  found that what had looked like one vast fen  
was  really  an  endless  network  of  pools,  and soft  mires. and  winding 
half-strangled water-courses.  Among  these  a cunning eye  and  foot  could 
thread  a wandering path. Gollum  certainly had that cunning, and needed all  
of it. His head on its long  neck  was ever turning this way and that, while 
he sniffed and muttered all the time to himself. Sometimes he would  hold up 
his  hand and halt  them, while he went forward a little, crouching, testing 
the ground with fingers or toes. or merely listening with one ear pressed to 
the earth. 
     It was dreary and wearisome. Cold clammy winter still held sway in this 
forsaken country. The only green was the scum  of  livid weed  on  the  dark  
greasy surfaces of the sullen waters. Dead grasses  and rotting reeds loomed 
up in the mists like ragged shadows of long-forgotten summers.  
     As the day wore on the light increased a little, and the mists  lifted, 
growing thinner and more  transparent. Far above  the rot and vapours of the 
world the Sun was riding high and golden now in a serene country with floors 
of dazzling  foam, but  only a  passing  ghost of her could they  see below, 
bleared,  pale, giving  no  colour  and  no  warmth. But even at this  faint 

####-reminder of  her  presence  Gollum  scowled and  flinched. He  halted  their 
journey,  and they  rested,  squatting  like  little hunted animals, in  the 
borders  of  a  great  brown  reed-thicket. There was  a   deep silence, only 
scraped on its surfaces by the faint quiver of empty seed-plumes, and broken  
grass-blades trembling in small air -movements that they could not feel. 
     'Not a bird! ' said Sam mournfully. 
     `No, no birds,' said  Gollum.  `Nice birds! ' He licked his  teeth. 'No 
birds  here.  There  are snakeses,  wormses,  things in the  pools. Lots  of 
things,  lots  of nasty things. No birds,' he ended sadly. Sam looked at him 
with distaste. 
     So passed  the  third day  of  their  journey with  Gollum.  Before the 
shadows of evening were long in happier lands, they went on again, always on 
and  on with only brief halts. These  they made not  so much for rest as  to 
help Gollum;  for now  even he had to go forward with great care, and he was 
sometimes at a loss for a while. They had come to the very midst of the Dead 
Marshes, and it was dark. 
     They  walked   slowly,  stooping,  keeping  close  in  line,  following 
attentively  every move that  Gollum made.  The fens grew more  wet, opening 
into  wide stagnant meres, among which it grew  more and more  difficult  to 
find the firmer places where feet could tread without sinking  into gurgling 
mud. The travellers were  light, or maybe none of them would ever have found 
a way through. 
     Presently it  grew  altogether  dark: the air  itself seemed  black and 
heavy to breathe. When lights appeared Sam  rubbed his eyes: he  thought his 
head was going  queer. He first  saw one with the corner of his  left eye, a  
wisp  of pale sheen that faded away;  but  others appeared soon  after: some 
like dimly shining smoke,  some  like  misty flames flickering  slowly above 
unseen candles; here and there they twisted like ghostly sheets  unfurled by 
hidden hands. But neither of his companions spoke a word. 
     At  last  Sam could bear it  no longer. `What's all this, Gollum? '  he 
said in a whisper. `These lights? They're all  round us now. Are we trapped?  
Who are they? ' 
     Gollum looked up. A  dark water was before him, and he was crawling  on 
the ground, this way and that, doubtful of the way. 'Yes, they are all round 
us,' he whispered. 'The tricksy lights. Candles  of corpses, yes, yes. Don't 
you heed them! Don't look! Don't follow them! Where's the master? ' 
     Sam looked back and found that Frodo had lagged again. He could not see 

####-him. He went some paces back into the darkness,  not daring to move far,  or  
to call in more than a  hoarse  whisper. Suddenly he stumbled against Frodo, 
who was standing lost in thought, looking at the pale lights. His hands hung 
stiff at his sides; water and slime were dripping from them. 
     `Come,  Mr. Frodo!  ' said Sam.  'Don't look at  them!  Gollum says  we 
mustn't. Let's keep up with him and get out of this cursed place as quick as 
we can -- if we can!  ' 
     `All right,' said Frodo,  as if returning out of a dream.  'I'm coming. 
Go on!  ' 
     Hurrying forward again, Sam tripped, catching his foot in some old root 
or  tussock.  He fell  and came heavily on  his hands, which  sank deep into 
sticky ooze,  so that his  fa ce was brought close to the surface of the dark 
mere. There was a faint hiss, a noisome smell went up, the  lights flickered 
and danced and swirled.  For a moment the water  below him  looked like some 
window, glazed with grimy glass, through which he was  peering. Wrenching 
his 
hands out  of the  bog, he sprang  back  with a cry. 'There are dead things,  
dead faces in the water,' he said with horror. 'Dead faces! ' 
     Gollum laughed. 'The Dead Marshes,  yes, yes: that is their names,'  he 
cackled. `You should not look in when the candles are lit.' 
     `Who are they? What are they? ' asked Sam shuddering, turning to Frodo, 
who was now behind him. 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo in a dreamlike voice. 'But I have seen  them 
too. In the pools when the candles were lit. They lie in all the pools, pale 
faces, deep deep under the dark water. I saw  them: grim faces and evil, and 
noble faces and sad. Many faces  proud and fair, and weeds  in their  silver  
hair.  But all foul, all rotting, all  dead. A fell light is in them.' Frodo 
hid  his eyes in his hands.  'I  know not who they are; but I thought I  saw 
there Men and Elves, and Orcs beside them.' 
     `Yes, yes,' said Gollum. `All dead, all rotten. Elves and Men and Orcs.  
The  Dead  Marshes. There was a great battle long ago, yes, so they told him 
when Smjagol was young, when I was young  before the Precious came. It was 
a 
great  battle. Tall  Men with long swords, and terrible  Elves,  and  Orcses 
shrieking. They fought on  the plain for days and months at the Black Gates.  
But  the  Marshes have grown since  then,  swallowed up the  graves;  always 
creeping, creeping.' 

####-     'But that is an age and more ago,'  said Sam. 'The Dead can't be really 
there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land? ' 
     `Who knows?  Smjagol doesn't  know,'  answered Gollum. 'You cannot reach 
them,  you  cannot touch them. We tried once, .yes,  precious. I tried once; 
but you cannot reach them. Only  shapes  to see, perhaps, not  to  touch. No 
precious! All dead.' 
     Sam  looked darkly at him and shuddered again, thinking that he guessed 
why Smjagol  had tried to touch them. `Well, I don't  want to  see them,' he 
said. 'Never again! Can't we get on and get away? ' 
     `Yes,  yes,' said  Gollum. `But slowly, very slowly. Very carefully! Or 
hobbits go  down to  join the Dead  ones  and light  little  candles. Follow 
Smjagol! Don't look at lights! ' 
     He  crawled away to the  right, seeking for a path round the mere. They  
came close behind, stooping, often using their hands even as he  did. 'Three 
precious  little Gollums in a row we shall be, if this goes on much longer,' 
thought Sam. 
     At last they came to the  end of the black  mere, and  they crossed it, 
perilously,  crawling  or hopping  from  one  treacherous island tussock  to 
another. Often they floundered, stepping or  falling hands-first into waters 
as  noisome as a cesspool,  till  they were slimed and  fouled almost  up to 
their necks and stank in one another's nostrils. 
     It was late  in the night  when at  length  they reached  firmer ground 
again.  Gollum hissed  and whispered to himself, but it appeared that he was 
pleased: in some mysterious way,  by some blended  sense of feel, and smell, 
and uncanny memory for shapes  in  the dark, he seemed to know just where he 
was again, and to be sure of his road ahead. 
     `Now on we  go!  ' he  said.  'Nice  hobbits! Brave  hobbits! Very very 
weary, of course; so we are, my precious, all of us. But we must take master  
away from the wicked lights, yes, yes, we must.' With these words he started 
off again, almost  at a trot,  down what  appeared to be a long lane between 
high reeds, and they  stumbled after him  as quickly as they could. But in a  
little while he stopped suddenly and sniffed the  air doubtfully, hissing as 
if he was troubled or displeased again. 
     'What is it? ' growled Sam, misinterpreting the signs. `What's the need 
to  sniff? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held. You stink, and 
master stinks; the whole place stinks.' 
     'Yes, yes, and Sam stinks! ' answered Gollum. `Poor Smjagol  smells it, 

####-but good  Smjagol bears  it. Helps nice master. But  that's no  matter.  The 
air's moving, change is coming. Smjagol wonders; he's not happy.' 
     He went on again, but his uneasiness grew, and  every  now and again he 
stood  up to his full height, craning his neck eastward and  southward.  For 
some  time the hobbits could not  hear  or feel what was troubling him. Then 
suddenly all  three  halted, stiffening and listening. To Frodo  and  Sam it 
seemed that  they  heard, far away, a  long  wailing cry, high and  thin and 
cruel.  They shivered. At  the same  moment the stirring  of the  air became 
perceptible to them; and it grew  very cold. As they  stood  straining their 
ears,  they heard a noise  like a  wind coming  in  the distance.  The misty 
lights wavered, dimmed, and went out. 
     Gollum would not move. He stood shaking and gibbering to himself, until 
with a rush the wind came upon  them, hissing and snarling over the marshes.  
The  night became less  dark,  light enough  for them to  see, or  half see, 
shapeless drifts of fog,  curling and  twisting  as it rolled over them  and 
passed them. Looking up they saw the clouds breaking and shredding; and then 
high in the south the moon glimmered out, riding in the flying wrack. 
     For a moment the sight of  it  gladdened the hearts of the hobbits; but 
Gollum cowered down, muttering curses on the White Face. Then Frodo and  
Sam 
staring at  the sky, breathing deeply of the  fresher  air, saw  it come:  a  
small  cloud  flying from the  accursed hills; a  black  shadow loosed  from 
Mordor;  a vast shape winged and ominous. It  scudded  across the  moon, and 
with a deadly cry went away westward, outrunning the wind in its fell speed. 
     They fell  forward, grovelling  heedlessly on the cold earth.  But  the 
shadow of horror wheeled and returned, passing  lower now, right above them, 
sweeping the  fen-reek with its ghastly wings. And then  it was gone, flying 
back to Mordor with the speed of the wrath of Sauron; and behind it the wind 
roared away, leaving the  Dead Marshes bare and bleak. The naked  waste,  as 
far  as the eye could pierce, even to the  distant  menace of the mountains,  
was dappled with the fitful moonlight. 
     Frodo and Sam got up, rubbing their eyes, like children wakened from an 
evil dream to find the familiar  night still over the world. But Gollum  lay 
on the ground as if  he had been stunned. They  roused him  with difficulty, 
and for some time  he  would not  lift  his  face, but knelt forward on  his 
elbows, covering the back of his head with his large flat hands.  
     `Wraiths!'  he wailed. `Wraiths on wings! The Precious is their master. 

####-They see everything, everything. Nothing can hide from them. Curse the White 
Face! And they tell  H im everything. He sees, He knows. Ach, gollum, gollum, 
gollum!  '  It was not until  the moon had  sunk, westering  far  beyond Tol 
Brandir, that he would get up or make a move. 
     From that time on Sam thought that he  sensed a change in Gollum again.  
He was more  fawning and would-be  friendly; but Sam  surprised some strange 
looks  in his eyes at times, especially towards Frodo; and he went back more 
and  more  into his  old  manner  of  speaking. And Sam  had another growing 
anxiety. Frodo seemed to be weary, weary to the point of exhaustion. He said 
nothing.  indeed he  hardly  spoke  at all; and  he did not complain, but he 
walked like one who carries a load, the  weight of which is ever increasing; 
and he dragged along, slower and slower, so that Sam had often to beg Gollum 
to wait and not to leave their master behind. 
     In fact with every step towards the gates of Mordor Frodo felt the Ring 
on  its chain about his neck grow  more burdensome.  He was now beginning to 
feel  it as an actual  weight  dragging him earthwards.  But far more he was 
troubled by the Eye: so he called it to  himself. It was that more  than the 
drag of the Ring that made him cower  and stoop as he walked. The Eye:  that 
horrible  growing sense of a  hostile will  that  strove with great power to 
pierce all shadows of  cloud, and earth, and  flesh, and to see you: to  pin 
you under its deadly gaze, naked, immovable. So thin, so frail and thin, the 
veils  were become  that still warded  it  off. Frodo  knew just  where  the 
present habitation and heart of that will now was: as certainly as a man can 
tell the  direction of the sun with his eyes shut. He was facing it, and its 
potency beat upon his brow.  
     Gollum probably felt something of the same sort.  But  what went  on in 
his wretched heart between the pressure of the Eye, and the lust of the Ring 
that was so near, and his grovelling  promise made half in the fear of  cold 
iron, the hobbits did not guess: Frodo gave no thought to it. Sam's mind was 
occupied  mostly  with his  master hardly  noticing the  dark cloud that had 
fallen on his own  heart. He put Frodo  in front  of  him  now, and  kept  a  
watchful eye on every movement of  his,  supporting him if  he stumbled, and 
trying to encourage him with clumsy words.  
     When day came at last the hobbits were surprised to see how much closer 
the ominous mountains had already drawn. The air was now clearer and colder, 
and though still far off, the walls of Mordor were no longer a cloudy menace 
on the edge of sight, but as  gr im black towers they frowned across a dismal 

####-waste. The marshes were at an end, dying away into dead peats and wide flats 
of  dry cracked mud. The land ahead rose in long shallow  slopes, barren and 
pitiless, towards the desert that lay at Sauron's gate. 
     While the  grey light lasted,  they cowered under a  black  stone  like 
worms,  shrinking, lest the winged terror should pass  and spy them with its 
cruel eyes. The  remainder of that journey  was a shadow of growing  fear in  
which  memory could  find   nothing  to  rest upon.  For two more nights they 
struggled on through the weary pathless land. The air, as it seemed to them, 
grew harsh, and filled  with  a  bitter  reek that caught their  breath  and 
parched their mouths.  
     At last,  on the  fifth morning since  they took the road  with Gollum, 
they halted once  more. Before  them  dark in  the dawn the great  mountains 
reached up to roofs of smoke and cloud. Out from  their feet were flung huge 
buttresses  and  broken hills  that were now at the nearest  scarce a  dozen 
miles away. Frodo looked round  in horror. Dreadful as the Dead  Marshes had 
been, and  the  arid moors  of the  Noman-lands, more loathsome  far was the 
country that the  crawling day now  slowly  unveiled  to his shrinking eyes.  
Even to the  Mere  of Dead Faces some haggard phantom of  green spring 
would 
come; but here neither spring nor summer would ever come again. Here 
nothing 
lived,  not  even the  leprous growths that feed on rottenness. The  gasping 
pools were choked  with ash and crawling muds, sickly white and grey, as  if 
the mountains had vomited the filth of  their entrails upon the lands about. 
High  mounds of crushed and powdered rock, great cones of earth fire-blasted 
and  poison-stained, stood like an obscene graveyard in endless rows, slowly  
revealed in the reluctant light. 
     They  had come to  the desolation that lay  before Mordor:  the lasting 
monument to the dark labour of its slaves that should  endure when all their 
purposes were  made  void; a  land defiled,  diseased beyond  all healing -- 
unless the Great  Sea should enter in and  wash  it with oblivion.  `I  feel 
sick,' said Sam. Frodo did not speak. 
     For a while  they stood there, like men on the edge  of a  sleep  where 
nightmare lurks, holding it off, though they know that they can only come to 
morning  through the  shadows. The light broadened and hardened. The 
gasping 
pits and  poisonous mounds grew hideously clear.  The  sun  was up,  walking 

####-among clouds and long flags of smoke, but even the sunlight was defiled. The 
hobbits had no welcome for that light; unfriendly  it seemed, revealing them 
in their helplessness  --  little squeaking ghosts that  wandered among  the 
ash-heaps of the Dark Lord. 
     Too weary  to go  further  they sought for some place where they  could 
rest. For a while  they sat without speaking  under the shadow of a mound of 
slag; but foul fumes  leaked out of it, catching their  throats and  choking 
them. Gollum was the first to get up. Spluttering  and  cursing he rose, and 
without  a  word or  a glance at the hobbits  he crawled  away on all fours.  
Frodo and Sam crawled  after him, until  they came to a wide almost circular 
pit, high-banked upon the west. It was  cold and dead, and  a foul  sump  of 
oily many-coloured ooze lay at its bottom.  In  this evil hole they cowered, 
hoping in its shadow to escape the attention of the Eye. 
     The  day passed  slowly. A  great thirst troubled  them, but they drank  
only a few  drops from their bottles-last filled in  the gully, which now as 
they looked back in thought seemed to  them a place of peace and beauty. The 
hobbits  took it in turn to watch. At first, tired as they  were, neither of 
them could sleep at all; but as the sun far away was climbing down into slow 
moving cloud, Sam dozed. It was Frodo's turn to bc on  guard. He lay back on 
the slope of the pit, but that did not ease the sense  of burden that was on 
him. He looked  up at the  smoke-streaked sky and saw strange phantoms, dark 
riding shapes, and  faces  out of the past. He  lost count of time, hovering 
between sleep and waking, until forgetfulness came over him. 
     Suddenly Sam woke up thinking that he heard his master calling.  It was 
evening. Frodo could not have called, for he had fallen asleep, and had slid 
down nearly to the  bottom of  the pit. Gollum was by  him. For a moment Sam 
thought that he was trying to  rouse Frodo; then he saw that it was  not so. 
Gollum was talking to himself. Smjagol was holding a  debate with some other 
thought  that used the same voice but  made it squeak and hiss. A pale light 
and a green light alternated in his eyes as he spoke. 
     `Smjagol promised,' said the first thought. 
     `Yes,  yes, my precious,' came  the  answer, 'we promised: to  save our 
Precious, not to let Him have it -- never. But it's going to Him yes, nearer  
every step.  What's the hobbit going  to  do  with it,  we wonders,  yes  we 
wonders.' 
     `I don't know. I can't help it. Master's  got it. Smjagol  promised  to 
help the master.' 

####-     `Yes,  yes, to  help the master: the  master of the Precious. But if we 
was master, then we could help ourselfs, yes, and still keep promises.' 
     `But Smjagol said  he  would be very  very good.  Nice  hobbit! He took  
cruel rope off Smjagol's leg. He speaks nicely to me.' 
     'Very very good, eh, my precious? Let's be  good,  good as fish,  sweet  
one, but to ourselfs. Not hurt the nice hobbit, of course, no, no.' 
     `But the Precious holds the promise,' the voice of Smjagol objected. 
     `Then take it,' said  the other,  `and let's hold it ourselfs!  Then we 
shall be master, gollum! Make the other hobbit, the nasty suspicious hobbit, 
make him crawl, yes, gollum!' 
     `But not the nice hobbit? ' 
     `Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. Still he's a Baggins, my precious,  
yes,  a  Baggins.  A  Baggins  stole it. He  found it  and  he said nothing, 
nothing. We hates Bagginses.' 
     'No, not this Baggins.' 
     'Yes, every Baggins. All peoples  that  keep the Precious. We must have 
it!  ' 
     `But He'll see, He'll know. He'll take it from us! ' 
     'He sees.  He knows.  He  heard us make silly  promises   -- against His 
orders, yes. Must take it. The Wraiths are searching. Must take it.' 
     'Not for Him! ' 
     'No, sweet  one. See, my precious: if  we  has it, then we  can escape, 
even from Him, eh? Perhaps we grows very strong, stronger than Wraiths. Lord 
Smjagol? Gollum  the Great?  The Gollum! Eat fish every day,  three times  a 
day; fresh from the sea. Most Precious Gollum! Must have it. We wants it, we 
wants it, we wants it!  ' 
     'But there's two of them. They'll wake too quick and kill  us,'  whined 
Smjagol in a last effort. `Not now. Not yet.' 
     'We  wants  it! But'  -- and here there  was a  long  pause, as if a new 
thought had wakened.  `Not yet,  eh? Perhaps not. She might help. She might, 
yes.' 
     `No, no! Not that way! ' wailed Smjagol. 
     `Yes! We wants it! We wants it! ' 
     Each time that  the second thought spoke, Gollum's  long hand crept out 
slowly, pawing towards Frodo, and then was drawn back with a jerk as 
Smjagol 
spoke  again. Finally  both  arms,  with long fingers  flexed and twitching, 

####-clawed towards his neck. 
     Sam had lain  still, fascinated by this debate, but watching every move 
that Gollum made  from under  his half-closed eye-lids.  To  his simple mind 
ordinary  hunger, the desire to eat hobbits, had seemed the chief  danger in 
Gollum. He realized  now that it was not so: Gollum was feeling the terrible 
call  of the Ring. The Dark Lord was He, of course; but Sam wondered who 
She 
was. One of  the nasty friends the little wretch had made in his wanderings, 
he supposed.  Then he  forgot the  point, for things had  plainly  gone  far 
enough, and were getting dangerous. A great heaviness  was in all his limbs,  
but he roused  himself with an effort and sat up. Something warned him to be 
careful  and  not to reveal that he had overheard  the debate. He let  out a  
loud sigh and gave a huge yawn. 
     `What's the time? ' he said sleepily. 
     Gollum sent  out a  long  hiss  through his  teeth. He stood  up  for a  
moment, tense and menacing; and then he collapsed, falling forward on to all 
fours and  crawling  up the bank  of the pit. 'Nice hobbits! Nice Sam! '  he 
said. 'Sleepy heads,  yes, sleepy  heads! Leave good  Smjagol to watch!  But 
it's evening. Dusk is creeping. Time to go.' 
     `High time!  ' thought Sam. 'And time we parted,  too.' Yet it  crossed 
his mind to wonder if indeed Gollum was not now as dangerous turned loose as 
kept with them. 'Curse him! I wish he was choked!' he muttered.  He stumbled 
down the bank and roused his master. 
     Strangely enough, Frodo felt  refreshed. He had been dreaming. The dark  
shadow  had  passed,  and  a  fair  vision  had visited him in  this land of 
disease. Nothing remained  of it in his  memory, yet  because of it he  felt 
glad and lighter of heart. His burden was less heavy on him. Gollum welcomed 
him  with  dog-like delight. He  chuckled and  chattered,  cracking his long 
fingers, and pawing at Frodo's knees. Frodo smiled at him. 
     'Come! ' he said. `You  have guided us well and faithfully. This is the 
last stage. Bring us to the Gate, and then I will not ask you to go further. 
Bring us to  the Gate,  and you  may  go where you wish  --  only not to our 
enemies.' 
     'To  the Gate, eh?' Gollum squeaked, seeming surprised  and frightened. 
'To the Gate, master  says! Yes, he says so.  And  good Smjagol does what he 
asks, O yes. But when we gets closer, we'll  see perhaps we'll  see then. It 
won't look nice at all. O no! O no!' 

####-     'Go on with you! ' said Sam. `Let's get it over! ' 
     In the falling dusk they  scrambled out of the pit and slowly  threaded 
their way through the dead land. They had not gone far before they felt once 
more the fear that had fallen on them  when  the winged shape swept over the 
marshes.  They  halted, cowering  on the evil -smelling ground; but  they saw 
nothing  in the gloomy evening sky above, and soon the  menace  passed, high 
overhead, going maybe  on some swift errand  from Barad-dyr.  After  a while 
Gollum got up and crept forward again, muttering and shaking. 
     About an hour after midnight the fear fell on them a third time, but it 
now seemed more remote, as if it were passing far above the clouds,  rushing 
with terrible  speed  into  the  West.  Gollum,  however,  was helpless with 
terror, and was convinced that they were  being hunted, that  their approach 
was known. 
     `Three times! ' he  whimpered.  'Three times is  a threat. They feel us 
here, they feel the Precious. The Precious is their master. We cannot go any  
further this way, no. It's no use, no use! ' 
     Pleading and  kind words were no longer of any  avail. It was not until 
Frodo commanded him angrily and  laid a hand on  his sword-hilt  that Gollum 
would get up again. Then at last he rose with  a snarl, and went before them 
like a beaten dog. 
     So they stumbled on through  the weary end  of the night, and until the 
coming  of another  day of  fear they walked  in silence with  bowed  heads,  
seeing nothing, and hearing nothing but the wind hissing in their ears. 
 

####- 

Chapter 3. The Black Gate is Closed 

 
 
     Before  the  next day dawned  their journey to  Mordor  was  over.  The 
marshes and the desert  were  behind them. Before  them, darkling  against a  
pallid sky, the great mountains reared their threatening heads.  
     Upon the west of  Mordor marched the gloomy range  of  Ephel D®ath, the 
Mountains of Shadow, and upon the north  the broken peaks and barren  ridges 
of  Ered  Lithui, grey as ash. But as these ranges  approached one  another, 
being indeed  but  parts  of  one  great  wall about  the mournful plains of 
Lithlad and of Gorgoroth, and the bitter inland sea of N®rnen amidmost, they 
swung out  long arms northward;  and between  these arms  there  was a  deep 
defile.  This was Cirith Gorgor,  the Haunted Pass, the entrance to the land 
of the Enemy. High cliffs lowered upon either side, and thrust forward  from 
its mouth were two  sheer  hills, black -boned and bare. Upon  them stood the 
Teeth  of  Mordor, two towers strong and  tall. In days long past they  were 
built by the Men of Gondor in their pride and power,  after the overthrow of 
Sauron and his flight, lest he  should seek to return to his old realm.  But 
the strength of Gondor  failed, and men slept, and for long years the towers 
stood  empty.  Then Sauron returned. Now  the watch-towers, which  had fallen 
into  decay,  were  repaired, and  filled  with arms,  and  garrisoned  with 
ceaseless vigilance. Stony-faced they were, with  dark  window-holes staring 
north and east and west, and each window was full of sleepless eyes. 
     Across the  mouth of the pass, from cliff to cliff,  the Dark Lord  had 
built a rampart of stone. In it  there  was a single gate of  iron, and upon 
its battlement sentinels paced unceasingly. Beneath the hills on either side 
the  rock  was bored into  a hundred caves and maggot -holes: there a host of 
orcs lurked, ready at a signal to issue forth like black ants going to  war. 
None could pass the  Teeth of  Mordor and not feel  their bite, unless  they 
were summoned by Sauron, or knew the  secret  passwords  that would open 
the 
Morannon, the black gate of his land. 
     The two hobbits  gazed at the towers and the wall in despair. Even from 
a distance they could see  in the dim light the movement of the black guards 
upon the wall,  and  the patrols before the gate. They lay now peering  over  
the edge of a rocky hollow beneath the out-stretched shadow of the northmost  

####-buttress of Ephel D®ath. Winging  the heavy air in a straight flight a crow, 
maybe, would have flown  but a furlong from  their hiding-place to the  black 
summit  of  the  nearer  tower. A faint smoke curled  above it, as  if  fire 
smouldered in the hill beneath. 
     Day  came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless  ridges of Ered 
Lithui.  Then su ddenly the cry of brazen-throated  trumpets was  heard: from 
the watch-towers they blared, and far away from hidden holds and outposts in 
the  hills  came  answering calls; and  further  still, remote but  deep and 
ominous, there echoed in  the hollow land  beyond the mighty horns  and drums 
of Barad-dyr. Another dreadful day of fear and toil had come to Mordor;  and 
the night-guards were  summoned to their dungeons and  deep  halls, and  the 
day-guards, evil-eyed and fell,  were marching to their posts. Steel gleamed 
dimly on the battlement. 
     `Well, here we are! ' said Sam. `Here's the Gate, and it looks to me as 
if that's about as far as we are ever going  to get. My word, but the Gaffer  
would have a thing or two to say, if he saw me now! Often said I'd come to a 
bad  end, if I didn't watch my step, he  did. But  now I don't suppose  I'll 
ever see  the  old fellow again. He'll miss his chance of  I told'ee so, Sam: 
more's the  pity. He could go on telling me as  long as he'd got breath,  if 
only I could see his old face again. But I'd have to get a wash first, or he 
wouldn't know me. 
     `I suppose it's no good asking "what way do we go now?" We  can't go no 
further -unless we want to ask the orcs for a lift.' 
     `No, no! ' said Gollum. `No use. We can't  go further. Smjagol  said so. 
He said: we'll go to the Gate, and then we'll see. And we do see. O yes.  my 
precious, we do see. Smjagol  knew  hobbits  could  not  go this way. O yes.  
Smjagol knew ' 
     'Then  what the plague  did you  bring  us here  for? '  said  Sam, not 
feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable. 
     `Master said so. Master says:  Bring  us to the  Gate. So  good Smjagol 
does so. Master said so, wise master.' 
     'I did,' said  Frodo. His face  was grim  and set. but resolute. He was 
filthy, haggard, and pinched with weariness,  but he cowered  no longer, and 
his eyes were clear. `I  said so, because  I purpose  to enter Mordor, and I 
know no other way. Therefore I shall go this  way. I do not ask anyone to go 
with me.' 
     `No, no,  master! ' wailed  Gollum; pawing at him, and seeming in great 

####-distress.  `No use  that way! No use! Don't take  the Precious to Him! He'll 
eat us all,  if He gets it,  eat all the world. Keep it, nice master, and be 
kind to Smjagol. Don't let  Him have  it. Or go away.  go to nice places, and 
give it back to little Smjagol. Yes, yes, master: give  it back, eh? Smjagol 
will  keep it  safe;  he will do  lots of good, especially to nice  hobbits.  
Hobbits go home. Don't go to the Gate! ' 
     'I am commanded  to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go,' 
said Frodo. 'If there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after  
must come.' 
     Sam said nothing.  The look on Frodo's face was enough for him  he knew 
that words of his were useless. And after all he never had any real hope  in 
the affair from the beginning; but being a cheerful hobbit he had not needed 
hope, as  long as  despair could  be  postponed. Now they  were come to  the 
bitter end. But he had stuck to his master all the way; that was what he had 
chiefly come  for, and he would  still stick to him. His master would not go 
to Mordor alone. Sam would go with him-and at any rate they would get rid of 
Gollum. 
     Gollum, however, did not  intend to  be  got rid  of, yet. He knelt  a t 
Frodo's feet, wringing his hands and  squeaking. 'Not this way, master! ' he 
pleaded, 'There is another way. O  yes indeed there is. Another way. darker, 
more difficult to find, more secret. But  Smjagol knows it. Let Smjagol show 
you!  ' 
     'Another wa y!  ' said Frodo  doubtfully, looking down  at  Gollum  with 
searching eyes. 
     'Yess! Yess indeed! There was another  way. Smjagol found it. Let's  go 
and see if it's still there! ' 
     `You have not spoken of this before.' 
     `No.  Master did not ask.  Master did not say what he  meant  to do. He 
does not  tell poor  Smjagol. He says: Smjagol, take me to  the Gate  -- and 
then good bye! Smjagol can run away and  be good. But now he says: I purpose 
to enter Mordor this way.  So  Smjagol is very  afraid. He does not  want to 
lose  nice  master.  And he promised, master made  him promise,  to save the 
Precious. But master is going to take it to Him, straight to the Black Hand, 
if master will go this way. So Smjagol must save them both, and he thinks of 
another  way  that there was, once upon a  time.  Nice  master. Smjagol very 
good, always helps.' 
     Sam frowned. If he could have  bored holes in Gollum  with his eyes, he 

####-would have done. His  mind was full of doubt.  To all appearances Gollum was 
genuinely  distressed  and anxious to  help Frodo. But  Sam, remembering the 
overheard debate, found it hard  to believe that the long submerged  Smjagol  
had come out on top: that voice at any rate had not had the last word in the 
debate. Sam's  guess was that  the Smjagol and Gollum halves (or what in his 
own mind he called Slinker  and Stinker) had made  a  truce and a  temporary 
alliance: neither  wanted  the Enemy to get the Ring;  both  wished to  keep 
Frodo from capture, and under their  eye, as long as possible -- at any rate 
as long as Stinker still had  a  chance  of laying hands  on his 'Precious'. 
Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted. 
     `And it's a good thing neither half  of the old villain don't know what 
master means to do ,' he thought. `If he knew that Mr. Frodo is trying to put 
an end  to his Precious for good and all, there'd be trouble pretty quick, I 
bet.  Anyhow old Stinker  is so frightened  of the Enemy  --  and  he's under 
orders  of some kind from him, or was  -- that he'd give us away rather than 
be caught helping us; and rather than let his  Precious be melted, maybe. At 
least  that's my idea. And I hope  the master will  think it  out carefully. 
He's  as wise as any,  but he's soft -hearted, that's what he is. It's beyond 
any Gamgee to guess what he'll do next.' 
     Frodo did not answer  Gollum at once.  While these  doubts were passing 
through Sam's slow  but  shrewd  mind, he  stood gazing out towards the dark 
cliff of Cirith Gorgor. The hollow in which they had taken refuge was delved 
in the side of a  low  hill, at some  little height above  a long trenchlike 
valley that lay between it and the outer buttresses of the mountains. In the  
midst of the valley stood the black foundations of the western  watch-tower.  
By morning-light the roads that converged upon the  Gate of Mordor could 
now 
be clearly  seen,  pale  and  dusty; one  winding  back  northwards; another  
dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui; 
and  a  third that ran towards him. As  it bent sharply round  the tower, it 
entered a narrow defile and passed not far below the hollow where  he stood. 
Westward, to his  right, it turned, skirting the shoulders of the mountains,  
and  went off southwards into  the deep shadows that mantled all the western 
sides of Ephel D®ath; beyond his sight it journeyed on  into the narrow land 
between the mountains and the Great River. 
     As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement 
on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the march, though for the 

####-most part they were hidden by the reeks and fumes drifting from the fens and 
wastes beyond. But here and there he caught the gleam of spears and helmets;  
and over the levels beside  the roads horsemen could be seen  riding in many  
companies.  He  remembered his  vision from afar upon Amon Hen,  so few 
days 
before, though now it seemed many years ago. Then he knew that the hope that 
had for one wild  moment stirred in his heart was vain. The trumpets had not  
rung in challenge but in greeting. This was no assault upon the Dark Lord by 
the men of Gondor, risen like avenging ghosts from the graves of valour long 
passed away. These were Men  of  other  race, out  of  the  wide  Eastlands, 
gathering  to the summons of their Overlord; armies that had encamped before 
his  Gate by  night  and  now marched in to swell  his mounting power. As if 
suddenly made fully  aware of the  peril  of their  position, alone,  in the 
growing light of day, so near  to this  vast menace, Frodo quickly drew  his 
frail grey hood close upon his head, and stepped down into the dell. Then he 
turned to Gollum. 
     `Smjagol,' he said, `I will trust you once more. lndeed it seems that I 
must do so,  and that it is my fate to receive help from you. where  I least  
looked  for  it, and  your  fate to help me whom you long  pursued with evil 
purpose.  So far  you have deserved well  of me  and have kept your  promise 
truly. Truly, I say and mean,' he added with a glance at Sam, 'for twice now 
we have been in your  power, and  you have  done no harm to us. Nor have you  
tried to take  from  me what you once sought.  May the third time  prove the 
best! But I warn you, Smjagol, you are in danger.' 
     `Yes, yes,  master!  '  said Gollum. `Dreadful  danger! Smjagol's bones 
shake to think of it. but he doesn't run away. He must help nice master.' 
     'I  did not mean  the danger that we all  share,' said Frodo. 'I mean a  
danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call the Precious.  
Remember tha t! It will hold you to it; but it will seek a way to twist it to 
your own undoing. Already you are being twisted. You revealed yourself to me 
just  now, foolishly.  Give it back  to  Smjagol you  said. Do  not say that 
again! Do not let that thought grow in you! You will  never get it back. But 
the desire of it may betray you to a bitter end. You will never get it back. 
In  the last need, Smjagol, I should put  on the Precious; and the  Precious 
mastered you  long ago. If  I,  wearing  it, were to  command you, you would 
obey, even if it were to leap from a precipice  or to cast yourself into the 
fire. And such would be my command. So have a care, Smjagol!' 

####-     Sam looked at his  master with approval, but also with surprise:  there 
was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not known before. 
It had  always been a notion  of his that the kindness of dear Mr. Frodo was 
of  such a high  degree that it  must imply a fair measure of  blindness. Of 
course, he  also  firmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the 
wisest person in the world (with the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and 
of Gandalf). Gollum in  his  own  way,  and with  much  more excuse  as  his 
acquaintance was  much briefer, may have _made a  similar mistake, confusing 
kindness and blindness.  At any rate  this speech abashed and terrified him. 
He grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but nice master. 
     Frodo waited patiently for a while,  then he spoke again less  sternly. 
`Come now, Gollum  or Smjagol if  you wish, tell  me of this other way,  and 
show me,  if you can,  what hope  there is in  it,  enough to justify me  in 
turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.' 
     But  Gollum  was in  a  pitiable state, and  Frodo's  threat  had quite 
unnerved  him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his 
mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled 
on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `poor little Smjagol'. After  
a  while he grew a  little calmer, and Frodo gathered bit by bit that, if  a  
traveller followed the road  that turned west of Ephel D®ath,  he would come 
in  time to a  crossing in a circle of  dark trees. On the right a road went 
down to Osgiliath and the bridges of the Anduin; in the middle the road went 
on southwards.  
     `On,  on,  on,'  said Gollum. `We  never went that way, but they say it 
goes a  hundred leagues, until  you  can  see the Great Water that is  never  
still. There are lots of fishes there, and big birds eat fishes: nice birds:  
but we never  went there, alas no! we never had a chance. And further  still 
there are more  lands, they say, but the Yellow Face is very hot  there, and 
there are seldom any clouds, and the men are  fierce and have dark faces. We 
do not want to see that land.' 
     `No! ' said Frodo. `But do not wander from your road. What of the third 
turning?  ' 
     `O yes, O yes, there is a third way,' said Gollum. `That is the road to 
the  left.  At  once it begins to climb up,  up, winding  and climbing  back 
towards the tall shadows. When it turns round the black rock, you'll see it. 
suddenly you'll see it above you, and you'll want to hide.' 
     `See it, see it? What will you see? ' 

####-     `The  old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used  to hear tales 
from the South, when Smjagol was young, long  ago. O yes. we  used  to  tell 
lots of  tales in the evening, sitting by the  banks  of the Great River, in 
the willow-lands, when the River was younger too, gollum, gollum.' He  began 
to weep and mutter. The hobbits waited patiently. 
     `Tales  out  of  the South,' Gollum went on again, `about  the tall Men 
with the shining eyes, and their houses like hills  of stone, and the silver  
crown of their King and his White Tree:  wonderful  tales.  They  built very 
tall towers,  and one they raised was silver -white,  and in it there  was  a  
stone like the Moon, and round it were great  white walls. O yes, there were 
many tales about the Tower of the Moon.' 
     `That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built ' said 
Frodo. `It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy.' 
     `Yes, He has only four  on the Black Hand,  but they are enough,'  said 
Gollum shuddering. 'And He hated Isildur's city.' 
     'What does he not  hate?  '  said Frodo. 'But what has the Tower of the 
Moon to do with us? ' 
     'Well, master, there  it  was and there it is: the  tall tower  and the 
white houses and the wall; but not nice now, not beautiful.  He conquered it  
long ago. It is a very terrible place  now. Travellers shiver  when they see 
it, they creep out of sight, they  avoid its shadow. But master will have to 
go that way. That is the  only other way, For the mountains are lower there, 
and the old road goes up and up, until it reaches  a dark  pass at  the top, 
and then it goes down,  down, again  --  to Gorgoroth.'  His voice sank  to a  
whisper and he shuddered. 
     `But how will  that help us?  ' asked  Sam. `Surely the Enemy knows all 
about his own mountains, and that road will be guarded as close as th is? The  
tower isn't empty, is it? ' 
     `O no, not empty!  ' whispered Gollum. `It seems empty, but it isn't, O 
no!  Very  dreadful things  live  there.  Orcs. yes always  Orcs; but  worse 
things, worse things live  there too. The road climbs right under the shadow  
of the walls and passes the gate. Nothing moves on the  road that they don't  
know about. The things inside know: the Silent Watchers.' 
     `So  that's your advice  is it,' said Sam, 'that  we  should go another  
long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one,  when we 
get there, if we ever do? ' 
     `No,   no  indeed,'  said  Gollum.  `Hobbits  must  see,  must  try  to 

####-understand. He does not expect attack that way. His Eye is all round, but it 
attends more to some places than to  others. He can't see everything  all at 
once, not yet. You see, He has conquered all the country west of the Shadowy 
Mountains down to  the River, and He holds the bridges now. He thinks no one 
can  come  to the  Moontower without fighting big battle at the  bridges, or  
getting lots of boats which they cannot hide and He will know about.' 
     'You seem to know a lot about what He's doing and  thinking,' said Sam. 
`Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs? ' 
     'Not  nice  hobbit,  not sensible,'  said Gollum, giving Sam  an  angry 
glance  and turning to Frodo. 'Smjagol has talked  to Orcs,  yes  of course, 
before he met master, and to many peoples:  he has walked very far. And what 
he says now many peoples  are saying.  It's here  in the North that  the big 
danger is for Him, and for us. He will come  out of the Black  Gate one day,  
one  day soon. That is the only  way big armies can come. But away down west  
He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.' 
     `Just so! ' said Sam, not to be put off. `And so we are to walk up  and 
knock at  their gate  and ask if we're on the right road  for Mordor? Or are 
they too silent to answer? It's not. sense. We might as well do it here, and 
save ourselves a long tramp.' 
     'Don't make jokes about it,' hissed Gollum.  `It isn't funny, O no! Not 
amusing. It's  nut sense to try  and get into  Mordor at all. But  if master  
says I must go  or I will go, then he  must try some way. But he must not go 
to the terrible city, O no, of course not. That is where Smjagol helps. nice 
Smjagol. though no one tells him what it is  all about. Smjagol helps again. 
He found it. He knows it.' 
     'What did you find? ' asked Frodo. 
     Gollum crouched down and his voice  sank to a whisper again. 'A  little 
path leading up into the mountains: and then a stair, a narrow stair, O yes,  
very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then'  -- his voice sank even 
lower  -- `a tunnel, a dark tunnel; and at last  a little cleft, and  a path 
high  above  the  main pass. It was that way  that  Smjagol got  out  of the 
darkness. But it was years ago. The path may  have vanished now; but perhaps 
not, perhaps not.' 
     `I  don't  like the sound of it at  all,' said Sam. `Sounds too easy at 
any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it'll be guarded  too. 
Wasn't it guarded, Gollum? ' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught  
a green gleam in Gollum's eye. Gollum muttered but did not reply. 

####-     'Is  it not guarded? ' asked Frodo sternly. `And did you escape out  of 
the  darkness,  Smjagol? Were you  not rather  permitted  to  depart upon an 
errand? That at  least is w hat Aragorn  thought,  who found you by the Dead 
Marshes some years ago.' 
     'It's  a lie! ' hissed Gollum, and an evil light came into  his eyes at 
the  naming of Aragorn. `He lied on me, yes he did. I did  escape, all by my 
poor  self.  Indeed I was told to seek for the Precious; and I have searched 
and searched, of course I have. But not for the  Black One. The Precious was 
ours, it was mine I tell you. I did escape.' 
     Frodo felt a  strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for once 
not so far from the truth as might be suspected; that he had somehow found a 
way out of Mordor, and at least believed that it was by his own cunning. For  
one thing,  he noted  that Gollum used  I, and that  seemed usually to be  a  
sign, on its rare appearances. that some remnants of old truth and sincerity 
were  for  the moment on top. But even  if Gollum  could  be trusted on this 
point, Frodo did not forget the wiles  of the  Enemy. The 'escape' may  have  
been allowed  or arranged, and well known in the Dark Tower. And in any case 
Gollum was plainly keeping a good deal back. 
     'I ask you again,' he said: `is not this secret way guarded? ' 
     But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen  mood. He had  all 
the injured air of a liar suspected when for once  he has told the truth. or  
part of it. He did not answer. 
     'Is it not guarded? ' Frodo repeated. 
     `Yes, yes,  perhaps.  No safe places  in  this  country,'  said  Gollum 
sulkily.  'No safe  places. But  master must try it or  go home.  . No other  
way.' They could not get him to say more. The name of the perilous place and 
the high pass he could not tell, or would not. 
     Its  name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful  rumour.  Aragorn  could  
perhaps have told them that name  and its  significance: Gandalf  would have 
warned  them. But they  were  alone, and Aragorn was  far away, and  Gandalf 
stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with Saruman, delayed by treason. 
Yet even  as he spoke his last words to Saruman, and the palantnr crashed in 
fire upon the steps of Orthanc. his thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise, 
over the long leagues his mind sought for them in hope and pity. 
     Maybe Frodo  felt  it,  not knowing it, as he  had upon Amon  Hen, even 
though he believed that Gandalf was  gone, gone  for ever into the shadow in 
Moria far  away. He  sat upon the ground for a long while, silent, his  head 

####-bowed, striving  to recall  all that Gandalf had  said to him. But  for this 
choice he could recall no counsel. Indeed Gandalf's guidance had  been taken 
from them too  soon, too  soon, while the Dark Land was still very far away. 
How they should enter it at the last  Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could 
not say. Into the stronghold of  the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he 
had  once  ventured.  But  into  Mordor,  to  the Mountain  of  Fire and  to 
Barad-dyr, since the Dark Lord  rose in power again, had  he ever   journeyed 
there?  Frodo did not think  so. And here he was  a little halfling from the 
Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where 
the  great ones could  not go, or dared not go. It was an evil  fate. But he 
had  taken it   on himself in his  own sitting-room in the far-off spring  of 
another  year,  so remote now that it was like a chapter  in a story  of the 
world's  youth, when the Trees  of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This 
was  an evil choice. Which way should  he choose? And if both  led to terror  
and death, what good lay in choice?  
     The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little  grey hollow where 
they lay,  so  near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence that could 
be felt, as if it  were a  thick veil that cut  them off from all the  world 
about them. Above them was a dome  of pale sky  barred  with fleeting smoke, 
but it seemed high and far away. as if seen through great deeps of air heavy 
with brooding thought. 
     Not even an eagle  poised  against the sun would have marked the hobbits 
sitting there, under  the weight of doom, silent, µ not moving, shrouded  in 
their  thin  grey  cloaks. For a moment he  might  have  paused  to consider  
Gollum,  a  tiny  figure sprawling  on  the ground:  there  perhaps  lay the 
famished skeleton of some child of Men, its ragged garment still clinging to  
it, its long arms and legs almost bone -white and bone-thin: no flesh worth a  
peck. 
     Frodo's head  was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back, with hands 
behind  his head, staring  out of his hood at the empty sky.  At least for a  
long while it was empty. Then presently Sam thought he saw a  dark bird-like 
figure wheel into the circle of his  sight, and hover, and  then wheel  away 
again.  Two more followed,  and then a fourth. They were very  small to look 
at,  yet  he knew,  somehow, that  they  were huge,  with a  vast stretch of 
pinion,  flying  at a great height.  He covered his eyes and  bent  forward, 
cowering. The same warning fear was on him as he had felt in the presence of 
the Black Riders, the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind 

####-and the shadow on the moon, though now it was not so crushing or compelling: 
the menace  was  more  remote.  But menace  it was. Frodo  felt it  too. His 
thought was broken. He stirred and shivered, but he did not look up.  Gollum 
huddled  himself together like a cornered spider. The winged shapes wheeled, 
and stooped swiftly down, speeding back to Mordor. 
     Sam took a deep breath. `The Riders are a bout again, up in the air,' he 
said in a hoarse whisper. 'I saw them. Do you think they  could see us? They 
were very  high up. And if  they are Black Riders same as  before, then they 
can't see much by daylight, can they?  ' 
     'No, perhaps not,' said Frodo.  `But their steeds  could see. And these 
winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably  see more than any 
other  creature.  They are like great  carrion birds. They  are  looking for  
something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.' 
     The feeling of dread passed, but the enfolding  silence was broken. For  
some  time  they had been cut  off  from  the  world, as if  in an invisible 
island; now they were laid bare again, peril had returned.  But  still Frodo 
did not  speak to Gollum or make h is choice. His eyes were closed, as if  he 
were dreaming, or looking  inward into his  heart  and memory.  At  last  he 
stirred  and  stood up,  and  it seemed that  he was  about to  speak and to 
decide. But `hark!' he said. `What is that?' 
     A new  fear  was upon  them. They heard singing and hoarse shouting. At 
first it seemed a long way off,  but it drew  nearer:  it was coming towards 
them. It leaped into all their minds that the Black Wings had spied them and 
had sent armed soldiers to seize  them: no speed seemed too great  for these 
terrible servants of Sauron.  They  crouched, listening.  The voices and the 
clink  of weapons and harness were very close.  Frodo and Sam loosened their 
small swords in their sheaths. Flight was impossible. 
     Gollum  rose slowly and crawled insect-like to the  lip of  the hollow. 
Very cautiously he raised himself inch by inch,  until he could peer over it 
between  two  broken points of stone. He remained there without  moving  for  
some time, making no sound.  Presen tly the voices began to recede again, and 
then they slowly faded away. Far off  a  horn  blew on  the ramparts of  the 
Morannon. Then quietly Gollum drew back and slipped down into the hollow.  
     'More  Men  going to Mordor,' he said in a low  voice. `Dark faces.  We 
have not seen Men like  these before, no, Smjagol has not.  They are fierce. 
They have  black  eyes, and long  black hair, and gold rings in  their ears;  
yes, lots  of beautiful gold. And  some have  red paint on their cheeks, and 

####-red cloaks;  and their  flags are red, and the tips of their spears; and they 
have round shields,  yellow and black with big  spikes. Not nice; very cruel 
wicked Men they look. Almost as bad as Orcs, and much bigger. Smjagol 
thinks 
they have come out of the South beyond the Great River's end:  they came  up 
that  road. They have passed  on  to the  Black Gate; but  more may  follow.  
Always  more  people  coming  to Mordor.  One  day  all the peoples  will be 
inside.' 
     `Were there any oliphaunts?' asked  Sam,  forgetting his  fear  in  his 
eagerness for news of strange places.  
     `No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts? ' said Gollum. 
     Sam stood up, putting his hands  behind his back (as he always did when  
'speaking poetry'), and began: 
     Grey as a mouse, 
     Big as a house. 
     Nose like a snake, 
     I make the earth shake, 
     As I tramp through the grass; 
     Trees crack as I pass. 
     With horns in my mouth  
     I walk in the South, 
     Flapping big ears. 
     Beyond count of years 
     I stump round and round, 
     Never lie on the ground, 
     Not even to die. 
     Oliphaunt am I, 
     Biggest of all, 
     Huge, old, and tall. 
     If ever you'd met me 
     You wouldn't forget me. 
     If you never do, 
     You won't think I'm true; 
     But old O liphaunt am I, 
     And I never lie. 
     'That,'  said Sam, when he  had finished  reciting, `that's a rhyme  we 
have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have our tales too, 

####-and news out of the South, you know.  In the old days hobbits used  to go on 
their travels now and again. Not that many ever came back,  and not that all 
they said  was believed: news from Bree,  and not sure  as Shiretalk , as the 
sayings  go. But I've heard tales of the big folk down away in the Sunlands.  
Swertings we call 'em in our tales;  and they ride on oliphaunts, 'tis said, 
when they fight. They put houses and towers  on  the oliphauntses backs  and 
all,  and  the oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another. So  when you  
said  "Men out of the  South, all  in red and gold;" I said  "were there any 
oliphaunts? " For if there was, I was going to  take a look, risk or no. But 
now I don't suppose I'll ever see  an oliphaunt. Maybe there ain't no such a  
beast.' He sighed. 
     `No, no oliphaunts,' said Gollum again.   'Smjagol has not heard of them. 
He does not want to see them. He does not want  them to be. Smjagol wants to 
go away from here and hide somewhere safer. Smjagol wants master to go. 
Nice 
master, won't he come with Smjagol? ' 
     Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst  of  all his cares when Sam 
trotted out the old fireside rhyme  of Oliphaunt, and the laugh had released 
him from hesitation. `I  wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a 
white one at their head,' he  said.  `Then  we'd break  a way into this evil 
land,  perhaps.  But  we've not; just our  own tired legs, that's all. Well, 
Smjagol, the third turn may turn the best. I will come with you.' 
     'Good  master,  wise master,  nice master!'  cried  Gollum in  delight, 
patting Frodo's knees. `Good master! Then rest  now, nice hobbits, under the 
shadow of  the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie quiet, till  the 
Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft  and quick as shadows 
we 
must be!' 

####-<h4>Chapter 4.</h4> <br> Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit 

 
 
     For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into 
the shade as the sun moved, until  at last the shadow of the western  rim of 
their  dell grew long, and darkness filled all  the hollow. Then they ate  a  
little,  and drank  sparingly.  Gollum  ate nothing, but  he  accepted water  
gladly. 
     `Soon get more now,' he said, licking  his lips. `Good water  runs down 
in  streams to  the Great River,  nice water in the lands  we are  going to. 
Smjagol will get food there too, perhaps. He's very hungry, yes, gollum! ' He 
set his two large flat hands on his  shrunken belly, and a pale  green light 
came into his eyes. 
     The  dusk was deep  when at length  they  set  out,  creeping over  the 
westward rim of the  dell, and fading like ghosts into the broken country on 
the borders of the road: The moon was now three nights from the full, but it  
did not climb over the mountains until nearly midnight, and the  early night 
was very dark. A single red light burned high up in the Tower s of the Teeth,  
but  otherwise no sign could be seen or heard of the sleepless watch  on the 
Morannon. 
     For  many  miles the red eye  seemed  to  stare at  them as they  fled, 
stumbling through a barren  stony country.  They did not dare  to  take  the 
road, but they  kept  it  on their left, following its line as  well as they 
could at a little distance.  At last, when  night  was growing old and  they 
were already weary, for they had taken only one short rest, the eye dwindled  
to a small fiery point a nd then vanished: they had turned the dark  northern 
shoulder of the lower mountains and were heading southwards. 
     With hearts  strangely  lightened they  now rested again, but  not  for  
long. They were  not going  quick enough for Gollum. By his reckoning it was 
nearly thirty leagues from the  Morannon to the cross-roads above Osgiliath, 
and he hoped to cover that distance in four journeys. So soon they struggled 
on once  more,  until the  dawn  began  to  spread  slowly in the wide  grey 
solitude. They had then  walked almost eight leagues; and the hobbits  could 
not have gone any further, even if they had dared. 
     The  growing  light revealed to them  a  land already, less  barren and 
ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their  left, but near at 
hand  they could  see the southward road,  now  bearing away  from the black 

####-roots of the  hills and  slanting  westwards.  Beyond it were slopes covered 
with  sombre trees  like  dark clouds. but  all about  them  lay  a  tumbled 
heathland, grown with ling and broom  and cornel, and other shrubs that they 
did not know. Here and there they saw knots  of tall pine-trees.  The hearts 
of the hobbits rose again a little in spite of weariness: the  air was fresh 
and  fragrant, and it reminded them  of the uplands of the Northfarthing far 
away. It seemed good to be reprieved, to  walk in a land that had  only been 
for a few years  under the dominion of  the Dark Lord and was not yet fallen 
wholly into  decay. But they did not forget their danger, nor the Black Gate 
that was still all too near, hidden though it was behind the gloomy heights. 
They looked about for a hiding-place where they could shelter from evil eyes 
while the light lasted. 
     The  day passed uneasily. They lay deep  in the heather and counted out 
the  slow hours, in which  there seemed  little  change; for they were still 
under the shadows of the Ephel D®ath, and the sun was veiled. Frodo slept at 
times, deeply and peacefully, either trusting Gollum or too tired to trouble 
about him; but Sam found it difficult to do more than doze, even when Gollum 
was plainly fast  asleep,  whiffling  and twitching in  his  secret  dreams.  
Hunger,  perhaps,  more than mistrust kept him wakeful: he had begun to long 
for a good homely meal, `something hot out of the pot'. 
     As soon as the land faded into a formless grey under coming night, they 
started  out  again. In  a little while  Gollum led  them  down  on  to  the 
southward road; and after that they went  on more quickly, though the danger 
was greater. Their ears were strained  for the sound of hoof or  foot on the 
road  ahead, or following them  from behind;  but the night passed, and they 
heard no sound of walker or rider. 
     The  road had been made in  a long lost  time:  and  for perhaps thirty 
miles below  the  Morannon it had been  newly repaired, but as it went south  
the wild encroached upon it. The handiwork of Men of old could still be seen 
in its straight sure  flight and level course:  now and again it cut its way 
through hillside slopes, or leaped over a stream upon a wide shapely arch of 
enduring masonry; but at  last  all signs  of stonework faded,  save  for  a  
broken pillar  here and  there,  peering out of bushes  at  the side, or old 
paving-stones still  lurking  amid weeds  and  moss.  Heather  and  trees and 
bracken  scrambled down  and  overhung  the banks, or sprawled out over  the 
surface. It dwindled at last to a country cart -road little  used; but it did 
not wind:  it held on its  own sure course and  guided them by  the swiftest  

####-way. 
     So  they  passed into the  northern marches  of that land that Men once 
called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift -falling streams.  
The  night  became  fine  under  star and round moon, and  it seemed  to the 
hobbits that the  fragrance  of the air grew as they went  forward; and from 
the  blowing and muttering of Gollum it  seemed that he noticed it  too, and 
did not relish it. At the first signs  of day  they halted  again.  They had 
come to the end of a long cutting, deep, and sheer -sided in  the middle,  by 
which the road clove its way through a stony  ridge. Now they climbed up the 
westward bank and looked abroad. 
     Day  was  opening in the sky, and they saw  that the mountains were now  
much further  off, receding ea stward in  a long curve  that was lost in  the 
distance. Before them, as they turned west, gentle slopes ran  down into dim 
hazes far  below. All about them were small woods of resinous trees, fir and 
cedar  and cypress. and other  kinds  unknown in the Shire, with wide glades 
among them; and  everywhere there was a wealth  of sweet -smelling  herbs and 
shrubs. The long journey from Rivendell had brought them far south of  their 
own  land,  but not until now in this more sheltered region had the  hobbits 
felt the change of clime.  Here Spring was  already busy about them:  fronds 
pierced  moss  and mould,  larches were  green-fingered, small flowers  were 
opening in the turf,  birds were singing. Ithilien, the garden of Gondor now 
desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness.  
     South  and  west  it looked  towards  the  warm lower vales  of Anduin, 
shielded  from   the  east  by  the  Ephel  D®ath  and  yet  not  under  the 
mountain-shadow,  protected  from the north  by the  Emyn Muil, open  to the 
southern  airs and the moist winds from the Sea far  away.  Many great trees 
grew there,  planted  long ago,  falling  into untended age amid a  riot  of 
careless descendants;  and groves and  thickets there  were of tamarisk  and 
pungent terebinth, of olive and of bay; and there were junipers and myrtles; 
and  thymes that grew in  bushes, or with their woody creeping stems mantled 
in deep tapestries the hidden stones; sages of many kinds putting forth blue 
flowers, or  red,  or pale green; and  marjorams and new-sprouting parsleys,  
and many  herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden-lore of Sam. The grots 
and  rocky  walls were  already  starred  with  saxifrages  and  stonecrops.  
Primeroles  and anemones were awake in the  filbert -brakes; and asphodel and 
many  lily-flowers  nodded their half-opened heads in the grass: deep  green 
grass beside  the pools,  where  falling streams  halted  in cool hollows on 

####-their journey down to Anduin. 
     The  travellers  turned their backs on the road and  went downhill.  As 
they walked, brushing their  way through bush  and herb,  sweet  odours rose 
about  them. Gollum coughed and retched; but the hobbits  breathed deep, and 
suddenly Sam laughed, for heart's ease not for jest. They followed a  stream 
that went  quickly down before them. Presently  it  brought them to a  small 
clear lake in a shallow dell: it lay in the broken ruins of an ancient stone 
basin, the carven rim of  which was  almost wholly  covered  with mosses and 
rose-brambles;  iris-swords stood in  ranks about it. and water -lily  leaves 
floated on  its dark gently-rippling surface; but it was deep and fresh, and 
spilled ever softly out over a stony lip at the far end. 
     Here they washed  themselves and  drank  their  fill at  the in-falling 
freshet. Then they sought for a resting-place, and a hiding-place: for  this 
land, fair-seeming  still, was nonetheless now territory of  the Enemy. They 
had not come  very far from the road, and yet even  in so short a space they 
had seen  scars of  the  old wars, and the newer wounds made by the Orcs and 
other foul servants of the Dark Lord:  a  pit of uncovered filth and refuse; 
trees hewn down wantonly  and  left to die, with evil runes or the fell sign 
of the Eye cut in rude strokes on their bark. 
     Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake. smelling and touching the 
unfamiliar  plants  and  trees,  forgetful for  the moment  of  Mordor,  was 
reminded suddenly  of their ever -present peril. He  stumbled on a ring still 
scorched by fire,  and in the midst of it  he  found  a pile  of charred and 
broken  bones  and skulls.  The  swift growth  of the wild  with  briar  and 
eglantine and trailing  clematis was already drawing a veil  over this place 
of dreadful feast and slaughter;  but it was not ancient. He hurried back to  
his companions, but he said nothing: the bones  were best  left in peace and 
not pawed and routed by Gollum. 
     `Let's  find a place to lie up in,' he said. 'Not lower down. Higher up 
for me.' 
     A  little way back above the lake they found a  deep brown bed  of last  
year's fern. Beyond it was a thicket of dark-leaved  bay-trees climbing up a  
steep bank  that was crowned with old cedars. Here they  decided to rest and 
pass  the day, which already promised to be  bright and warm. A good day for 
strolling  on their way along the groves and glades of Ithilien; but  though 
Orcs may shun the sunlight. there were too many places here where they could 
lie hid  and  watch;  and  other  evil  eyes were  abroad:  Sauron had  many 

####-servants. Gollum, in any case, would not move under  the  Yellow. Face. Soon 
it  would look over the dark  ridges of the Ephel D®ath, and he would  faint 
and cower in the light and heat. 
     Sam had  been giving earnest thought to food as they  marched. Now that 
the despair  of  the  impassable Gate was behind  him,  he did  not feel  so 
inclined as his master  to take no thought  for  their livelihood beyond the 
end of their errand;  and anyway it seemed wiser to him to save the waybread 
of the  Elves for worse times ahead.  Six  days or more had  passed since he 
reckoned that they had only a bare supply for three weeks. 
     'If we  reach the Fire in  that time, we'll be lucky at this rate! ' he 
thought. `And we might be wanting to get back. We might! ' 
     Besides,  at  the  end  of a  long  night -march, and  after bathing and 
drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper,  or a breakfast, by 
the fire  in  the old kitchen  at  Bagshot Row was what he really wanted. An  
idea struck him and he turned to Gollum. Gollum had just begun  to sneak off 
on his own, and he was crawling away on all fours through the fern. 
     `Hi! Gollum! ' said Sam. `Where are you going?  Hunting? Well see here, 
old  noser, you don't like our  food,  and I'd  not  be sorry  for  a change 
myself.  Your new motto's always ready to help . Could you find anything  fit 
for a hungry hobbit? ' 
     `Yes, perhaps,  yes,' said Gollum. `Smjagol always helps, if they  asks 
-- if they asks nicely.' 
     `Right!' said Sam `I does ask. And if that isn't nice enough, I begs.' 
     Gollum disappeared.  He  was away some  time, and  Frodo  after  a  few 
mouthfuls of lembas settled deep into the brown  fern and went to sleep. Sam 
looked  at  him. The early  daylight  was only just creeping  down into  the 
shadows u nder the trees, but he saw his master's face very clearly, and  his 
hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside him. He was reminded suddenly 
of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in  the  house of Elrond,  after his  deadly 
wound. Then as  he  had  kept watch Sam  had  noticed that at times  a light 
seemed to be shining faintly within; but now the light  was even clearer and  
stronger. Frodo's face was peaceful, the marks of fear and care had left it; 
but it looked old,  old and beautiful, as  if the  chiselling of the shaping 
years was now revealed  in  many  fine lines  that  had before  been hidden, 
though the  identity of the face was not changed. Not that Sam Gamgee put it 
that  way to himself.  He shook  his  head, as if finding words useless, and 
murmured:  `I  love  him. He's  like that, and  sometimes it shines through, 

####-somehow. But I love him, whether or no.' 
     Gollum returned quietly  and  peered over  Sam's  shoulder.  Looking at 
Frodo, he shut his eyes  and crawled away without a sound. Sam came  to him a  
moment later and found him  chewing something  and muttering  to himself. 
On 
the ground beside him lay two small rabbits, which he was  beginning to  eye 
greedily. 
     'Smjagol always helps,' he said. `He has brought rabbits, nice rabbits.  
But ma ster has gone  to sleep,  and perhaps Sam wants to sleep. Doesn't want 
rabbits now?  Smjagol  tries  to help,  but he can't catch  things all in  a  
minute.' 
     Sam,  however, had no objection to rabbit at all, and said so. At least 
not to cooked rabbit. All hobbits, of  course,  can cook, for they  begin to 
learn the art before their letters (which  many never reach):  but Sam was a  
good  cook, even by  hobbit  reckoning,  and he had  done a good deal of the 
camp-cooking on their travels, when there was a  chance. He  still  hopefully 
carried some of his gear in his pack: a  small tinder -box, two small shallow 
pans,  the smaller fitting into  the  larger; inside them  a wooden spoon, a  
short  two-pronged  fork and  some skewers were  stowed;  and hidden  at the 
bottom of the pack in a flat wooden box a dwindling treasure, some salt. But 
he needed a  fire, and other things besides. He thought for  a bit, while he 
took out his  knife, cleaned and whetted it, and began to dress the rabbits.  
He was not going to leave Frodo alone asleep even for a few minutes. 
     'Now,  Gollum,'  he said, 'I've  another job for you. Go and fill these 
pans with water, and bring  'em back!  ' 
     'Smjagol will fetch water, yes,' said Gollum. 'But what does the hobbit 
want all that water for? He has drunk, he has washed.' 
     'Never you mind,' said Sam. `If you  can't guess, you'll soon find out. 
And  the  sooner you fetch the  water,  the  sooner you'll  learn. Don't you  
damage one of my pans, or I'll carve you into mincemeat.' 
     While Gollum was  away Sam took  another look  at Frodo.  He  was still 
sleeping quietly, but Sam was now struck  most  by the leanness  of his face 
and hands. 'Too thin and drawn he is,' he muttered. 'Not right for a hobbit. 
If I can get these coneys cooked, I'm going to wake him up.' 
     Sam gathered a pile of the driest fern, and then scrambled  up the bank  
collecting a  bundle of twigs and broken wood; the fallen branch of a  cedar 
at the top gave him a good supply. He cut out some turves at the foot of the 

####-bank just outside the fern-brake, and made a shallow hole and laid  his fuel 
in it. Being handy with flint and tinder he soon had a small blaze going. It  
made little or no smoke but gave off an aromatic scent. He was just stooping  
over  his  fire,   shielding it and  building  it up with heavier  wood, when 
Gollum returned, carrying the pans carefully and grumbling to himself.  
     He set the pans down, and then suddenly saw what Sam was doing. He gave 
a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened and angry. `Ach! Sss 
-- no!' he cried. `No! Silly  hobbits, foolish, yes foolish! They mustn't do 
it!' 
     `Mustn't do what?' asked Sam in surprise. 
     `Not make  the nassty  red  tongues,'  hissed Gollum. `Fire, fire! It's 
dangerous, yes it is.  It burns, it kills. And it will  bring enemies, yes it 
will.' 
     'I don't think so,' said  Sam. `Don't see  why it  should, if you don't 
put wet stuff on it and make a  smother.  But if it does, it does. I'm going 
to risk it, anyhow. I'm going to stew these coneys.' 
     'Stew the rabbits!'  squealed Gollum in  dismay. `Spoil  beautiful meat 
Smjagol  saved for  you,  poor  hungry  Smjagol! What for? What  for,  silly 
hobbit? They are young, they are tender, they are nice. Eat them, eat them!' 
He clawed a t the nearest rabbit, already skinned and lying by the fire. 
     `Now, now! ' said Sam. `Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes  you, 
and raw  coney chokes me. If you give  me a coney, the coney's mine, see, to 
cook,  if  I have  a mind. And  I have.  You needn't watch me.  Go and catch  
another  and eat it as you  fancy  -- somewhere private  and out o' my sight. 
Then you  won't see the  fire, and  I shan't see you, and we'll both  be the 
happier. I'll see the fire don't smoke, if that's any comfort to you.' 
     Gollum withdrew grumbling,  and  crawled  into  the  fern.  Sam  busied 
himself with his pans. `What a hobbit needs with coney,' he said to himself,  
`is some  herbs and roots,  especially taters -- not to mention bread. Herbs 
we can manage, seemingly.' 
     `Gollum!'  he  called softly. `Third  time pays  for all. I  want  some 
herbs.' Gollum's head peeped out of the  fern,  but  his looks  were neither  
helpful  nor friendly.  `A few  bay-leaves, some  thyme and sage, will do  -- 
before the water boils,' said Sam. 
     `No! ' said  Gollum. `Smjagol is  not pleased. And Smjagol doesn't like 
smelly leaves. He doesn't eat  grasses or roots,  no precious, not till he's 
starving or very sick, poor Smjagol. ' 

####-     `Smjagol'll get  into real true hot water , when this water boils, if he 
don't do  as  he's  asked,' growled  Sam.  `Sam'll put  his head in it,  yes 
precious. And I'd make him look for turnips  and carrots, and taters too, if 
it was  the time o'  the  year. I'll bet there's all sorts  of  good  things 
running wild in this country. I'd give a lot for half a dozen taters.' 
     `Smjagol won't  go, O no precious, not this time,' hissed Gollum. `He's 
frightened, and  he's very tired, and this hobbit's  not nice,  not nice  at 
all.  Smjagol won't  grub for roots and  carrotses  and  --  taters.  What's 
taters, precious, eh, what's taters?  
     `Po-ta -toes,' said Sam. 'The  Gaffer's delight, and  rare  good ballast  
for an empty belly. But you won't find any, so you needn't look. But be good  
Smjagol  and  fetch me the herbs, and I'll think better of you. What's more, 
if you turn  over a new leaf, and keep it turned, I'll cook you  some taters 
one of  these days. I will: fried fish  and chips served by  S.  Gamgee. You  
couldn't say no to that.' 
     `Yes, yes we could. Spoiling nice fish, scorching it. Give me fish now, 
and keep nassty chips! ' 
     `Oh you're hopeless,' said Sam. 'Go to sleep!' 
     In  the end he had to find what  he wanted for himself;  but he did not 
have to  go far, not out  of sight of the  place where his master lay, still 
sleeping. For a while  Sam sat musing, and  tending the fire till  the water  
boiled. The daylight grew  and the  air became  warm; the dew faded off turf 
and leaf. Soon  the  rabbits  cut  up  lay simmering in their pans with  the 
bunched herbs. Almost Sam fell asleep as the  time went by. He let them stew 
for close on an hour, testing them now and again with  his fork, and tasting 
the broth. 
     When  he thought  all  was ready he lifted the pans off  the  fire, and 
crept along to Frodo. Frodo  half opened his eyes as Sam stood over him, and 
then he  wakened from  his  dreaming: another gentle, unrecoverable dream of 
peace. 
     `Hullo, Sam! ' he said. `Not resting? Is  anything wrong?  What  is the 
time?  ' 
     `About a couple of hours after daybreak,' said  Sam, `and  nigh on half 
past  eight  by  Shire  clocks, maybe. But nothing's wrong. Though  it ain't  
quite what I'd call right: no stock, no onions, no taters. I've got a bit of 
a stew for you, and some broth, Mr. Frodo.  Do you good. You'll have  to sup 
it in your mug; or straight from the pan, when it's  cooled a bit. I haven't  

####-brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.' 
     Frodo  yawned and stretched.  'You  should  have been  resting Sam,' he 
said. 'And lighting   a fire  was dangerous  in these  parts.  But I do  feel 
hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? ' 
     'A  present from Smjagol,' said Sam: `a brace o' young coneys; though I 
fancy Gollum's regretting them now. But there's nought to go with them but a 
few herbs.' 
     Sam and  his master sat just within  the  fern-brake and ate their stew 
from the pans, sharing the  old fork and spoon. They allowed themselves half 
a piece of the Elvish waybread each. It seemed a feast. 
     'Wheew!  Gollum! ' Sam called and whistled softly. 'Come on! Still time 
to  change your  mind.  There's some left, if you want to try stewed coney.' 
There was no answer. 
     `Oh  well, I suppose he's gone off to find something for himself. We'll 
finish it,' said Sam. 
     `And then you must take some sleep,' said Frodo. 
     `Don't you drop off, while  I'm nodding, Mr. Frodo. I  don't  feel  too 
sure  of  him.  There's  a  good  deal  of  Stinker -the bad  Gollum, if  you  
understand me-in him still, and it's getting stronger again. Not but what  I 
think he'd try to throttle  me first  now. We don't see eye to eye, and he's 
not pleased with Sam, O no precious, not pleased at all.' 
     They finished, and Sam went off to the stream to rinse his  gear. As he 
stood  up to return, he looked back up the  slope. At that moment he saw the 
sun  rise out of the reek, or haze, or dark shadow, or whatever it was, that 
lay  ever to the east, and it sent its  golden beams down upon the trees and 
glades about him. Then  he noticed a thin spiral of blue-grey,  smoke, plain 
to see as it  caught  the sunlight, rising  from a thicket above him. With a  
shock  he realized that  this was the smoke  from  his  little cooking-fire, 
which he had neglected to put out. 
     `That won't do! Never thought  it  would show like that! ' he muttered, 
and  he started to hurry back. Suddenly he halted and listened. Had he heard 
a whistle  or not? Or was  it the  call of some strange  bird?  If it was  a  
whistle, it did  not  come from Frodo's direction. There it went again  from 
another place! Sam began to run as well as he could uphill. 
     He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had kindled 
some  fern  at  the edge  of the fire,  and the fern blazing  up had set the 
turves  smouldering.  Hastily he stamped  out  what  was left of  the  fire, 

####-scattered the ashes, and laid the turves on the hole.  Then he crept back to 
Frodo. 
     'Did  you hear a whistle, and  what sounded like an answer? ' he asked. 
`A few minutes back. I hope  it was  only a bird,  but it didn't  sound quite 
like that: more like  somebody mimicking  a  bird-call, I  thought.  And I'm 
afraid my bit of fire's been smoking. Now if I've gone  and brought trouble, 
I'll never forgive myself. Nor won't have a chance, maybe! ' 
     `Hush! ' whispered Frodo. `I thought I heard voices.' 
     The  two  hobbits  trussed their  small packs,  put  them  on ready for  
flight,  and  then  crawled  deeper  into  the  fern.  There  they  crouched 
listening. 
     There was no doubt of the voices. They were speaking low and furtively,  
but they were near, and coming nearer. Then quite suddenly one spoke clearly 
close at hand. 
     `Here! Here is where the smoke came from! ' it said. `'Twill be nigh at 
hand. In the fern, no  doubt. We shall have it like  a coney in a trap. Then 
we shall learn what kind of thing it is.' 
     `Aye, and what it knows! ' said a second voice. 
     At  once  four  men  came  striding  through  the  fern from  different 
directions. Since flight and hiding  were no longer  possible, Frodo and Sam 
sprang  to their  feet,  putting  back to back and whipping out  their small 
swords. 
     If they were astonished at what they saw, their captors were even  more 
astonished.  Four tall Men  stood there. Two  had spears in their hands with 
broad  bright heads. Two  had great bows,  almost of their  own height,  and  
great quivers of long green-feathered arrows. All had swords at their sides,  
and were clad in green  and  brown of varied hues, as if the better  to walk  
unseen in the glades of Ithilien. Green  gauntlets covered  their hands, and 
their faces were hooded and  masked with green, except for their eyes, which 
were very keen and bright. At once  Frodo thought of  Boromir, for these Men 
were like him in stature and bearing, a nd in their manner of speech. 
     `We have  not found what we sought,' said one. `But what have we found? 
' 
     'Not Orcs,' said another, releasing the hilt of his sword, which he had 
seized when he saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo's hand. 
     `Elves? ' said a third, doubtfully. 
     `Nay! Not Elves,'  said the fourth, the tallest, and as it appeared the 

####-chief among them. `Elves do not  walk in Ithilien in these  days.  And Elves  
are wondrous fair to look upon, or so 'tis said.' 
     'Meaning  we're not, I take you,' said Sam. `Thank you kindly. And when  
you've finished discussing us,  perhaps you'll say who you are, and  why you  
can't let two tired travellers rest.' 
     The tall  green man laughed grimly.  `I am Faramir, Captain of Gondor,' 
he said. `But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the 
Dark Tower, or of the White.' 
     `But  we are  neither,' said Frodo.  `And  travellers  we are, whatever  
Captain Faramir may say.' 
     'Then make  haste to declare yourselves and your errand,' said Faramir. 
'We  have  a  work  to  do,  and this is  no time or place  for riddling  or  
parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? ' 
     `The third? ' 
     'Yes, the skulking fellow that  we saw with his  nose in  the pool down 
yonder. He had an ill-favoured look. Some spying breed of Orc, I guess, or a  
creature of theirs. But he gave us the slip by some fox-trick.' 
     'I do not know where he is,' said Frodo. 'He is only a chance companion 
met  upon our road; and I  am  not answerable for  him. If you  come on him, 
spare  him. Bring him  or send him  to  us.  He is  only  a wretched gangrel 
creature, but I have  him under my care for a while. But as for  us,  we are 
Hobbits of the Shire,  far to  the North and West, beyond many rivers. Frodo 
son of Drogo is my name, and with  me is  Samwise son  of Hamfast, a  worthy 
hobbit in my  service.  We  have come  by long ways  --  out of Rivendell, or  
Imladris as some call  it.'  Here  Faramir started  and grew  intent. 'Seven 
companions we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left  at  Parth Galen 
above Rauros:  two of  my kin; a  Dwarf there was also,  and an Elf, and two  
Men.  They were  Aragorn;  and Boromir, who said  that he came out of  Minas 
Tirith, a city in the South.' 
     'Boromir! ' all the four men exclaimed. 
     'Boromir son of  the Lord Denethor?' said  Faramir, and a strange stern 
look came into his  face. 'You came with  him? That is news indeed, if it be 
true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir  son of Denethor was High  Warden 
of  the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are 
you then,  and  what had you  to do  with  him?  Be swift, for  the  Sun  is 
climbing!' 
     'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell?  

####-' Frodo replied. 
     Seek for the Sword that was Broken. 
     In Imladris it dwells. 
     'The words are known indeed,' said Faramir in astonishment. `It is some 
token of your truth that you also know them.' 
     `Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,' said 
Frodo. 'And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.' 
     `That I see,' said Faramir thoughtfully. `Or I see that it might be so. 
And what is Isildur's Bane? ' 
     `That is hidden,'  answered  Frodo. `Doubtless it will be made clear in 
time.' 
     `We must  learn more of this,' said Faramir, `and know  what brings you  
so far east under the shadow of yonder --,' he pointed and said no name. 'But 
not now. We have business in hand. You are in peril.  and you would not have 
gone far  by field or road this day.  There will be hard handstrokes nigh at 
hand ere the day is full. Then death, or swift flight bark to Anduin. I will 
leave two to guard you, for your  good and for mine. Wise  man trusts not to 
chance-meeting on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with 
you.' 
     'Farewell!' said Frodo, bowing low. `Think what you will, I am a friend 
of  all enemies of the One Enemy. We  would go with you, if we halfling folk 
could hope to serve  you, such doughty men and strong  as you seem, and if my 
errand permitted it. May the light shine on your swords!' 
     'The  Halflings  are  courteous  folk,  whatever  else  they  be,' said 
Faramir. `Farewell!' 
     The hobbits  sat  down  again, but  they said nothing to one another of 
their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just  under the dappling  shadow of the 
dark bay-trees, two men remained on guard. They took off their masks now and 
again  to cool them,  as the  day-heat grew,  and Frodo  saw that  they were 
goodly  men, pale-skinned, dark of hair, with  grey eyes and  faces sad  and 
proud. They spoke together in soft voices, at first using the Common Speech, 
but after the manner of older days, and then changing to another language of 
their own. To his amazement, as he listened Frodo   became aware that  it was 
the Elven-tongue that they spoke, or one but little different; and he looked 
at  them with wonder, for he  knew  then that  they must be D®nedain  of the 
South, men of the line of the Lords of Westernesse. 
     After a  while  he spoke to  them; but they were slow  and  cautious in 

####-answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers of Gondor, 
and 
they were Rangers of Ithilien; for they  were descended  from folk who lived 
in Ithilien  at  one time, before  it  was overrun. From  such  men the Lord 
Denethor chose his forayers, who  crossed the Anduin secretly (how or where, 
they would not say) to harry  the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between 
the Ephel D®ath and the River. 
     `It  is close on  ten leagues hence to the east -shore of Anduin,'  said 
Mablung, 'and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new errand on this 
journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse them! ' 
     'Aye, curse the Southrons! ' said Damrod.  ` 'Tis  said that there were 
dealings  of  old between Gondor  and the kingdoms of the  Harad in  the Far 
South; though there was never friendship. In those days our bounds were away 
south beyond the mouths of Anduin, and Umbar, the nearest  of  their realms,  
acknowledged our sway. But that is long since. 'Tis many lives of  Men since 
any passed to or  fro between us. Now of late we have learned that the Enemy 
has been among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they 
were 
ever ready to His  will -as have so many also  in the East .  I doubt not that 
the days of Gondor are numbered, and the  walls of Minas Tirith are  doomed, 
so great is His strength and malice.' 
     `But still we will not sit idle  and  let Him do all as He would,' said 
Mablung. `These cursed Southrons  come  now marching up the ancient roads 
to 
swell the hosts of  the Dark Tower.  Yea, up  the very roads  that  craft of 
Gondor made.  And they go  ever more heedlessly, we learn, thinking that the 
power of their new  master is great enough, so that the mere shadow  of  His 
hills  will  protect  them.  We  come  to teach  them  another lesson. Great 
strength of them was  reported  to us  some days ago, marching north. One of 
their regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon-up on 
the road  above, where it passes through  the cloven way. The road may pass, 
but  they  shall  not! Not  while Faramir  is Captain.  He  leads now in all 
perilous  ventures.  But his life is charmed, or fate  spares him  for  some 
other end.' 
     Their talk  died down into a listening silence.  All  seemed  still and 
watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered  out. With his 

####-keen hobbit-eyes  he  saw that many  more Men were about. He  could see 
them 
stealing up the slopes, singly or in long files, keeping always to the shade 
of  grove or thicket, or crawling, hardly visible  in their brown and  green 
raiment, through  grass and  brake. All were  hooded  and  masked,  and  had 
gauntlets on  their hands, and  were  armed like Faramir and his companions. 
Before  long they had  all passed and  vanished. The sun rose till it neared 
the South. The shadows shrank. 
     `I wonder where that dratted Gollum is?  '  thought Sam, as  he crawled 
back into deeper shade. `He  stands  a fair chance of being spitted  for  an 
Orc,  or of being roasted  by the Yellow Face. But I  fancy he'll look after  
himself.' He lay down beside Frodo and began to doze. 
     He woke,  thinking that he had heard horns blowing. He sat up.  It  was 
now high noon.  The guards stood alert and tense in the shadow of the trees.  
Suddenly the horns rang out louder and beyond  mistake from  above, over the 
top  of  the slope. Sam thought that he heard cries and wild  shouting also, 
but  the sound was faint,  as  if  it came out  of some  distant  cave. Then 
presently the noise of  fighting broke  out  near at hand, just  above their 
hiding-place. He could hear plainly the ringing grate of steel on steel, the 
clang  of sword on iron  cap, the  dull beat of blade on  shield;  men  were 
yelling and screaming, and one clear loud voice was calling Gondor! Gondor! 
     `It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,' said Sam 
to Frodo. 'They're as near as I want them now.' 
     But the noise grew closer. `They are  coming!' cried Damrod. `See! Some 
of  the Southrons have broken  from the trap  and are flying  from the road. 
There they go! Our men after them, and the Captain leading.' 
     Sam,  eager to see more, went now and joined the guards. He scrambled a 
little  way  up into one of  the  larger of the bay-trees. For  a  moment he 
caught a glimpse of swarthy men in red running  down the slope  some way off 
with green-clad warriors leaping after them, hewing them down  as they fled. 
Arrows  were thick in the air. Then suddenly straight over  the rim of their 
sheltering bank, a man fell, crashing through  the slender trees,  nearly on 
top of them. He came to  rest in the  fern a  few feet away,  face downward, 
green arrow-feathers  sticking from  his neck  below  a  golden collar.  His 
scarlet robes  were tattered, his  corslet of overlapping brazen  plates was 
rent and hewn, his black plaits of hair braided with gold were drenched with 
blood. His brown hand still clutched the hilt of a broken sword. 

####-     It was Sam's  first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not 
like it much. He was  glad that he could not see the dead  face. He wondered 
what the man's name was and where he came from; and if he was really evil of 
heart, or what lies or threats had  led him on the long march from his home; 
and if  he would not really rather have stayed there in peace-all in a flash 
of  thought which  was  quickly driven  from his mind. For  just as  Mablung 
stepped towards the  fallen  body, there was a  new noise.  Great crying and 
shouting. Amidst it Sam heard a shrill bellowing or trumpeting.  And  then a  
great thudding and bumping. like huge rams dinning on the ground. 
     'Ware! Ware!' cried Damrod  to his  companion. 'May the Valar turn  him 
aside! Mymak! Mymak!' 
     To his  astonishment and terror,  and lasting delight,  Sam  saw a vast  
shape crash out of  the trees  and come careering down the  slope. Big as  a  
house, much bigger than a house, it looked to him, a grey-clad moving  hill.  
Fear and wonder, maybe, enlarged him in the hobbit's eyes, but the  Mymak of 
Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk, and the like of him does not walk now 
in Middle-earth; his kin that  live still in latter days are but memories of 
his girth and majesty. On  he came, straight towards  the watchers, and then 
swerved  aside in the nick of time,  passing only  a few yards away, rocking  
the ground beneath their feet: his great legs like trees, enormous sail-like 
ears  spread out, long  snout upraised like a huge serpent  about to strike. 
his small red eyes raging. His upturned hornlike tusks were bound with bands 
of  gold and dripped with blood. His trappings of  scarlet and  gold flapped 
about him in wild tatters. The  ruins  of  what seemed a very war -tower  lay 
upon his heaving back, smashed in his furious passage thr ough the woods; and 
high upon  his  neck still desperately clung a  tiny  figure-the  body  of a  
mighty warrior, a giant among the Swertings. 
     On the great  beast  thundered, blundering  in blind wrath through pool 
and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about  the triple hide of 
his flanks. Men of  both sides  fled before him,  but  many  he overtook and 
crushed  to  the  ground. Soon he was lost  to  view, still  trumpeting  and 
stamping far away. What became of him Sam never heard: whether  he escaped 
to 
roam the wild for a time, until he perished far from his home or was trapped 
in some deep pit; or whether he raged on until he plunged in the Great River  
and was swallowed up. 
     Sam drew a  deep breath. 'An Oliphaunt it  was!' he said. `S o there are 

####-Oliphaunts, and I have seen one.  What a life! But no one  at home will ever  
believe me. Well, if that's over, I'll have a bit of sleep.' 
     'Sleep while you  may,' said Mablung. `But  the Captain will return, if 
he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We shall be pursued 
as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy, and that will not be long.' 
     `Go quietly when you must!' said Sam.  `No need  to disturb my sleep. I 
was walking all night.' 
     Mablung  laughed.  `I  do not  think  the Captain will leave you  here, 
Master Samwise,' he said. 'But you shall see.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. The Window on the West 

 
 
     It seemed to Sam that he had only dozed for a few minutes when he awoke 
to find that it was late afternoon and Faramir had come back. He had brought 
many men  with him; indeed all the survivors of the foray  were now gathered 
on the  slope nearby, two  or  three  hundred  strong.  They sat in  a  wide 
semicircle,  between the  arms  of which Faramir was  seated  on the ground,  
while  Frodo  stood  before him.  It looked strangely  like the  trial  of a  
prisoner. 
     Sam crept out from the fern, but no one paid any  attention to him, and 
he placed himself at the end of the rows of men, where he could see and hear 
all that wa s  going on. He  watched and listened  intently, ready to dash to 
his  master's  aid if needed. He  could see  Faramir's face,  which  was now 
unmasked:  it  was  stern  and commanding, and  a keen  wit lay  behind  his 
searching glance. Doubt was in the grey eyes that gazed steadily at Frodo. 
     Sam soon became aware that  the Captain was not satisfied  with Frodo's 
account of  himself at several  points:  what part  he  had  to  play in the 
Company  that set out from Rivendell; why he had  left Boromir; and where he 
was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur's Bane. Plainly he 
saw that Frodo was concealing from him some matter of great importance. 
     'But  it  was at the coming of the Halfling  that Isildur's Bane should 
waken,  or so  one must  read the words,' he  insisted. `If then you are the 
Halfling that was  named,  doubtless you brought this thing, whatever it may 
be, to the Council of which you speak, and there Boromir saw it. Do you deny 
it?  ' 
     Frodo made no answer. 'So! ' said Faramir. `I  wish then  to learn from 
you more of it; for  what  concerns Boromir concerns  me. An orc-arrow  slew 
Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are plenty,  and the sight 
of one would not be taken as a  sign of Doom by Boromir of  Gondor.  Had you  
this thing  in keeping?  It is hidden, you say;  but is not that because you  
choose to hide it? ' 
     'No, not because I choose,' answered Frodo. `It  does not belong to me. 
It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if any  could claim 
it, it would  be Aragorn son  of Arathorn, whom  I named, the  leader of our 
Company from Moria to Rauros.' 

####-     'Why so, and not  Boromir, prince of the City that the  sons of Elendil 
founded?  ' 
     'Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage, father to father, from 
Isildur  Elendil's son  himself. And the sword  that he  bears was Elendil's 
sword.' 
     A  murmur of  astonishment ran through all the ring  of men. Some cried  
aloud: 'The sword of Elendil! The  sword  of Elendil comes  to Minas Tirith!  
Great tidings! ' But Faramir's face was unmoved. 
     `Maybe,' he said. `But so great a claim will need to be established and 
clear proofs  will  be  required,  should this  Aragorn ever  come  to Minas 
Tirith. He  had not come,  nor any of your  Company, when I set out six days 
ago.' 
     'Boromir was satisfied of that claim,' said Frodo. `Indeed, if  Boromir 
were here, he would answer all your  questions. And since  he was already at 
Rauros many days back, and intended then to go straight to your city, if you  
return, you may  soon learn the  answers  there. My part in the  Company was 
known to him, as  to all the others. for it was appointed to me by Elrond of 
Imladris  himself before the  whole Council. On that errand I came into this 
country, but it is not mine to reveal to any  outside the Company. Yet those 
who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder it.' 
     Frodo's tone was  proud, whatever he felt, and Sam approved of it;  but 
it did not appease Faramir. 
     `So!' he said. `You bid me mind my own  affairs,  and get me back home,  
and let  you be.  Boromir  will tell all, when he comes. When he comes,  say 
you! Were you a friend of Boromir?' 
     Vividly before Frodo's  mind came the memory  of Boromir's assault upon 
him, and for a moment he hesitated. Faramir's eyes watching him grew harder. 
'Boromir was a valiant member of our Company ' said Frodo at length. 'Yes, I 
was his friend, for my part.' 
     Faramir smiled grimly. `Then you would grieve to learn that  Boromir is 
dead?  ' 
     'I  would  grieve  indeed,'  said  Frodo.  Then catching  the  look  in 
Faramir's eyes, he faltered. 'Dead?'  he said. `Do you mean that he is dead, 
and that you knew it? You have been trying to trap me in words, playing with 
me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?' 
     `I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,' said Faramir. 
     `How then did  he die, and how do  you know of  it? Since  you say that 

####-none of the Company had reached the city when you left.' 
     'As to the  manner  of  his death, I  had  hoped that  his  friend  and 
companion would tell me how it was.' 
     `But he was alive and strong when we parted. And he lives still for all 
that I know. Though surely there are many perils in the world.' 
     `Many indeed,' said Faramir, `and treachery not the least.' 
     Sam  had  been  getting more  and  more  impatient  and  angry at  this 
conversation. These last words were  more  than he  could bear, and bursting  
into the middle of the ring, he strode up to his master's side. 
     'Begging  your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he  said, `but this has gone on long 
enough. He's no right to talk to you so.  After all you've gone  through, as 
much for his good and all these great Men as for anyone else. 
     'See here,  Captain! ' He  planted himself squarely in front of Faramir 
his  hands  on his hips,  and a look on his  face as  if he was addressing a  
young  hobbit who  had offered him what  he  called `sauce'  when questioned 
about  visits to the orchard. There was some  murmuring, but also some grins 
on the faces  of the men looking on: the  sight of  their Captain sitting on 
the ground  and  eye to eye with  a young hobbit, legs well apart, bristling 
with wrath, was one beyond their experience. `See here! ' he said. `What are 
you driving at? Let's come to  the point before all the Orcs of  Mordor come 
down on us! If  you think my master murdered this Boromir and then ran away, 
you've got no sense; but say it, and have done!  And then  let us  know what 
you mean to do  about it. But it's a pity that folk as talk  about  fighting 
the  Enemy  can't  let  others  do  their  bit  in  their  own  way  without 
interfering. He'd be mighty pleased, if he could see you now. Think he'd got  
a new friend, he would.' 
     `Patience!' said Faramir, but without anger.  `Do not speak before your 
master, whose wit is  greater than yours. And I do not need any to teach  me 
of our peril. Even  so, I  spare a brief time, in order to judge justly in a  
hard matter. Were I as hasty as you, I might have slain you long ago.  For I 
am commanded  to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of  the 
Lord of Gondor.  But I do not slay man  or beast needlessly, and  not gladly 
even when it is needed. Neither do  I talk  in vain. So be comforted. Sit by 
your master, and be silent! ' 
     Sam  sat down heavily with a red face.  Faramir turned to Frodo  again: 
'You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tidings of  death 
have many wings.  Night oft brings news to  near kindred, 'tis said. Boromir  

####-was my brother.' 
     A  shadow  of sorrow passed  over his face.  `Do you remember  aught of  
special mark that the Lord Boromir bore with him among his gear?' 
     Frodo  thought for a moment,  fearing some further trap, and  wondering  
how this debate would turn in the end. He had hardly saved the Ring from the 
proud grasp of Boromir, and how he would fare now among so many men, 
warlike 
and  strong, he did not know.  Yet he felt in his heart that Faramir, though 
he was much like his brother  in  looks, was a man less self-regarding, both 
sterner and wiser. 'I remember that Boromir bore a horn,' he said at last. 
     `You remember  well, and  as  one  who has  in  truth  seen  him,' said 
Faramir. `Then maybe you can see it in your mind's eye: a great horn  of the  
wild ox of the East, bound with silver, and written with ancient characters. 
That horn the eldest son of our house has borne for many generations; and it  
is said that if it be blown at need anywhere within the bounds of Gondor, as 
the realm was of old, its voice will not pass unheeded. 
     'Five days ere I set out on this venture, eleven days ago at about this 
hour of  the  day, I heard  the blowing of that horn: from the northward  it 
seemed, but  dim, as if  it were but an echo in the mind. A boding of ill we 
thought it, my father and I, for no tidings had we heard of Boromir since he 
went away, and no watcher on our borders had seen him pass. And on the third 
night after another and a stranger thing befell me. 
     'I sat at night by  the waters of Anduin,  in the grey dark  under  the 
young pale moon, watching the ever -moving  stream;  and the  sad  reeds were 
rustling. So do we  ever watch the shores  nigh Osgiliath, which our enemies 
now partly hold,  and issue from it to harry our lands. Bu t  that night  all 
the world slept at the midnight hour. Then I saw, or it seemed that I saw, a  
boat floating  on  the water, glimmering  grey,  a small  boat  of a strange 
fashion with a high prow. and there was none to row or steer it. 
     `An awe fell on me, for  a pale light was round it. But I rose and went 
to the bank, and began to walk out into the stream,  for I was drawn towards 
it. Then the boat turned towards me, and stayed its pace, and floated slowly 
by  within my hand's reach, yet I durst not handle it. It waded  deep, as if 
it were heavily burdened,  and it  seemed to me  as it passed under  my gaze 
that it was  almost filled with clear water, from which came the light;  and 
lapped in the water a warrior lay asleep. 
     `A broken  sword  was on his knee. I saw  many wounds on  him.  It  was 

####-Boromir, my brother, dead. I knew his gear, his sword, his beloved face. One 
thing only I missed: his horn. One thing only I knew not: a fair belt, as it 
were  of linked golden leaves, about his waist. Boromir!  I cried.  Where is 
thy  horn? Whither  goest  thou? O Boromir! But he was gone. The boat turned 
into the stream and passed  glimmering on into the night. Dreamlike  it was.  
and yet no dream, for there  was  no waking. And I do  not  doubt that he is 
dead and has passed down the River to the Sea.' 
     'Alas!' said  Frodo. 'That was indeed Boromir as I  knew  him. For  the 
golden belt was given to him in Lothlurien by the Lady Galadriel. She it was 
that clothed us as  you see  us, in elven-grey. This   brooch is of  the same 
workmanship.' He touched the green and silver leaf that  fastened  his cloak 
beneath his throat. 
     Faramir looked  closely at it.  `It is beautiful,' he  said. 'Yes, 'tis 
work of  the same  craft. So  then  you passed through the Land  of  Lurien?  
Laurelindurenan  it  was named of  old, but long now it  has lain beyond the  
knowledge of Men,' he added softly, regarding Frodo with a new wonder in his 
eyes. `Much  that was strange about you  I begin now to understand. Will you 
not tell me more? For it is a bitter thought that Boromir died, within sight 
of the land of his home.' 
     'No more can I say than I have said,' answered Frodo. `Though your tale 
fills me with foreboding. A  vision it was that  you saw, I  think,  and  no 
more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be. Unless indeed it  
is some lying trick of the Enemy. I have  seen the faces of fair warriors of 
old laid in  sleep beneath the  pools of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so  by 
his foul arts.' 
     'Nay, it was not so,' said Faramir.  'For his works  fill the heart with 
loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.' 
     `Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth? ' asked Frodo. 'For  
no boat could have been carried  over the stony hills from  Tol Brandir; and 
Boromir purposed to  go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan. 
And 
yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in 
the boiling pools, though laden with water? ' 
     'I know not,' said Faramir. 'But whence came the boat? ' 
     `From Lurien,' said Frodo. 'In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to 
the Falls. They also were of elven-work.' 
     'You passed through the Hidden Land,' said  Faramir, `but it seems that 

####-you little  understood its power. If  Men have dealings with the Mistress of 
Magic who dwells in the Golden  Wood, then they may look for  strange things 
to follow. For it  is perilous  for mortal man  to walk  out of the world of 
this Sun, and few of old came thence unchanged, 'tis said. 
     `Boromir, O Boromir!' he cried. `What did she say to you, the Lady that 
dies not? What did she see? What woke in your heart then? Why went you  ever 
to Laurelindurenan, and came not by your own road,  upon the horses of 
Rohan 
riding home in the morning? ' 
     Then turning again to  Frodo, he spoke in a quiet voice  once more. 'To 
those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frodo son of Drogo. 
But  not  here  or now.  maybe. But lest you  still should  think my  tale a  
vision, I  will tell  you this.  The horn of Boromir at  least  returned  in 
truth, and not in seeming. The horn came,  but it was  cloven  in two, as it 
were  by axe or  sword. The shards  came severally to  shore: one was  found 
among the reeds where watchers of  Gondor lay,  northwards below the infalls 
of the Entwash;  the other was found spinning on the flood by one who had an 
errand in the water. Strange chances, but murder will out, 'tis said. 
     'And now the horn of the elder  son lies in two pieces upon the lap  of 
Denethor,  sitting in his high chair, waiting for news. And you  can tell me 
nothing of the cleaving of the horn? ' 
     'No, I did not know of it,' said Frodo. `But the day when you  heard it 
blowing, if your reckoning is true, was  the day when we parted, when  I and  
my servant left the Company.  And now your  tale fills me with dread. For if 
Boromir was then in peril and was slain, I  must fear that all my companions 
perished too. And they were my kindred and my friends. 
     `Will you not put aside your dou bt of me and let me go? I am weary, and 
full of grief, and  afraid. But I have a deed to do, or to attempt, before I 
too am slain. And the more need of haste, if  we two halflings are  all that 
remain of our fellowship. 
     'Go back, Faramir,  valiant Captain of  Gondor,  and  defend  your city 
while you may, and let me go where my doom takes me.' 
     `For me there is no comfort in our speech together,' said Faramir; `but 
you surely draw from it more dread than need be. Unless the people of Lurien 
themselves came  to him,  who arrayed Boromir  as for a funeral? Not Orcs or  
servants of the Nameless. Some of your Company, I guess, live still. 
     `But whatever befell on the North March, you, Frodo, I doubt no longer. 

####-If  hard days  have made  me  any judge of Men's words and faces, then I may 
make a guess at Halflings! Though,' and  now he  smiled, `there is something 
strange about you, Frodo, an elvish air, maybe. But more lies upon our words 
together than I thought at first. I should now take you back to Minas Tirith 
to answer  there to Denethor, and my  life will justly be forfeit, if  I now 
choose a course that  proves ill for my city. So I will not  decide in haste 
what is to be done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.' 
     He  sprang to his feet and issued some orders. At once the men who were 
gathered round  him broke up into small  groups, and went off  this way  and  
that, vanishing quickly into the shadows of the  rocks and  trees. Soon only 
Mablung and Damrod remained. 
     'Now you,  Frodo  and Samwise, will come  with me  and my guards,' said 
Faramir. `You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was your purpose. 
It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely watched after  this 
affray than it has been yet. And  you cannot,  I  think, go far today in any 
case, for you are weary. And so are we.  We are going  now to a secret place  
we  have, somewhat less than ten  miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the 
Enemy have not found  it yet, and if they did, we  could  hold  it long even 
against many. There we may lie up and rest for  a while, and you with us. In 
the morning I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.' 
     There was nothing for Frodo to do but to  fall in with this request, or  
order. It seemed in any case a  wise course for the moment, since this  foray 
of the men  of  Gondor had made a  journey  in Ithilien more  dangerous than 
ever. 
     They set out  at once: Mablung and  Damrod  a little ahead, and Faramir 
with Frodo  and Sam  behind.  Skirting the hither  side of the pool where the 
hobbits had bathed, they crossed the stream, climbed a long bank, and passed 
into  green-shadowed woodlands that marched  ever downwards  and  
westwards.  
While they walked, as swiftly as the hobbits could go, they talked in hushed 
voices. 
     'I broke off our speech together,' said Faramir, 'not only because time 
pressed, as Master Samwise had reminded me, but also because we were 
drawing 
near to matters that were better not debated openly  before many men. It was 
for that  reason that I turned rather to the matter of my brother and let be 
Isildur's Bane. You were not wholly frank with me, Frodo.' 

####-     `I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,' said Frodo. 
     `I do  not blame you,'  said Faramir. 'You spoke  with skill  in  a hard 
place, and wisely,  it seemed to me. But I learned or  guessed more from you  
than your words said. You  were  not friendly with Boromir, or  you  did not  
part  in  friendship.  You, and  Master  Samwise,  too,  I  guess have  some 
grievance. Now I  loved him dearly, and would gladly avenge his death, yet I 
knew  him well. Isildur's  Bane  -- I would hazard that  Isildur's Bane  lay 
between you and was a cause of contention in  your Company. Clearly it is  a 
mighty  heirloom  of some sort,  and such  things do not  breed  peace among 
confederates, not if aught may be  learned from  ancient tales. Do I not hit 
near the mark?' 
     `Near,' said Frodo,  'but  not in the gold.  There was no contention in 
our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we should take from 
the 
Emyn  Muil. But be that as it may, ancient  tales teach us also the peril of 
rash words concerning such things as  -- heirlooms.' 
     'Ah,  then it is as I  thought: your trouble was with Boromir alone. He 
wished this  thing  brou ght to Minas Tirith. Alas! it is a crooked fate that 
seals  your lips who saw him  last, and holds from me that  which I  long to 
know: what  was  in his  heart and  thought  in his latest hours. Whether he 
erred or no, of this I am sure: he died well, achieving some good thing. His 
face was more beautiful even than in life. 
     `But, Frodo, I pressed you hard at first about Isildur's  Bane. Forgive 
me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not had time for thought. 
We had had a hard fight, and there was more than enough to fill my mind. But 
even as  I spoke  with you, I drew  nearer to the mark, and so  deliberately 
shot wider.  For you must know that much is still preserved  of ancient lore 
among the Rulers of the city  that is not spread abroad. We of  my house are 
not  of the line  of  Elendil.  though the blood of N®menor is in us. For we 
reckon back our line  to  Mardil,  the good steward, who ruled in the king's 
stead when he went away to war. And  that was King Edrnur, last  of the line 
of Anbrion, and  childless, and  he  came never back. And the stewards  have 
governed the city since that day, though it was many generations of Men ago. 
     'And this I remember of Boromir as a boy,  when we together learned the 
tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always it displeased him 
that his father was not king. "How many hundreds of years needs it to make a 
steward a king, if the king  returns not? " he asked. "Few years, maybe,  in 

####-other places of less  royalty," my father  answered. "In Gondor ten thousand  
years  would not  suffice."  Alas!  poor Boromir. Does  that  not  tell  you  
something of him?  ' 
     'It does,' said Frodo. `Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.' 
     'I doubt it  not,' said  Faramir. `If he  were satisfied  of  Aragorn's 
claim  as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch has not yet 
come. They had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become rivals in her wars.  
     `But I  stray. We in  the house of Denethor  know much  ancient lore by 
long  tradition,  and  there  are  moreover in  our  treasuries many  things 
preserved: books and tablets writ on withered parchments, yea, and on stone, 
and on leaves of silver and of gold, in divers characters. Some none can now 
read; and for the rest,  few ever unlock them. I can  read a little in them, 
for I have had teaching. It was these  records that brought the Grey Pilgrim 
to  us. I first saw him when I was a child,  and he has been twice or thrice 
since then.' 
     'The Grey Pilgrim? ' said Frodo. 'Had he a name?' 
     'Mithrandir we  called  him in  elf-fashion,' said Faramir,  'and he was 
content. Many are my names in many countries,  he said. Mithrandir among the 
Elves, Tharkyn to the  Dwarves; Olurin I was in my youth in the West that is  
forgotten, in  the  South Incbnus, in  the North Gandalf;  to the East  I go 
not.' 
     'Gandalf!' said Frodo. 'I thought it was he.  Gandalf  the Grey dearest 
of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in Moria.' 
     'Mithrandir  was  lost!  '  said Faramir.  'An  evil fate seems to have 
pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one  of so  great 
wisdom, and of  power -- for many wonderful things he  did among us  -- could 
perish, and so much lore be taken from the world. Are you sure of  this, and  
that he did not just leave you and depart where he would? ' 
     'Alas! yes,' said Frodo. `I saw him fall into the abyss.' 
     'I see that there  is some great tale of dread in  this.' said  Faramir 
`which perhaps  you may  tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir was, I 
now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the deeds that are done 
in our  time. Had he been  among us to  consult concerning the hard words of 
our  dream, he could have  made them clear to  us without need of messenger. 
Yet, maybe,  he would  not  have done  so,  and  the journey of Boromir  was 
doomed.  Mithrandir never spoke to us  of what was to  be, nor did he reveal 
his purposes. He got leave of Denethor, how I  do  not  know, to look at the 

####-secrets of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would  teach 
(and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would  question us above all 
else  concerning  the  Great  Battle  that was fought  upon Dagorlad  in the 
beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not name was over thrown.  And 
he was 
eager for stories of Isildur, though of him we had less to tell; for nothing 
certain was ever known among us of his end.' 
     Now Faramir's voice  sank  to  a whisper. 'But  this much  I learned or  
guessed, and I have kept it ever secr et in my heart since: that Isildur took  
somewhat from the hand of the Unnamed, ere he  went away  from Gondor, 
never 
to be  seen among  mortal  men  again. Here  I  thought  was  the answer  to 
Mithrandir's questioning. But  it seemed then a  matter that concerned  only 
the seekers after ancient learning. Nor when the riddling words of our dream 
were  debated  among us,  did I think of Isildur's  Bane as being  this same 
thing. For Isildur was ambushed and  slain by  orc-arrows, according  to the  
only legend that we knew, and Mithrandir had never told me more. 
     `What in truth  this Thing is I cannot yet guess; but some heirloom  of 
power and peril it must be.  A  fell weapon, perchance, devised by  the Dark  
Lord. If it were  a thing that gave advantage in battle. I can  well believe 
that  Boromir,  the  proud  and fearless,  often rash, ever anxious for  the 
victory of  Minas  Tirith (and  his own glory therein), might desire  such a  
thing and be allured by  it. Alas that ever he went on that errand! I should 
have been chosen by my  father and the elders but he put himself forward. as 
being the older and the hardier (both true), and he would not be stayed. 
     'But  fear no more!  I would not take  this  thing,  if it  lay by  the 
highway. Not were Minas Tirith  falling in ruin and  I alone could save her, 
so, using the  weapon of the Dark Lord for her  good and my glory.  No. I do 
not wish for such triumphs, Frodo son of Drogo.' 
     'Neither did the Council,' said Frodo. 'Nor do  I. I would have nothing 
to do with such matters.' 
     `For myself,' said Faramir, 'I would see the White Tree in flower again 
in the courts of the kings, and the Silver Crown return, and Minas Tirith in 
peace:  Minas  Anor again as of old, full of light, high and fair, beautiful 
as a queen among other queens: not a mistress of many  slaves, nay, not even 
a kind mistress of willing slaves.  War  must  be, while we defend our lives 
against a destroyer who would devour all; but I do not love the bright sword 

####-for its sharpness, nor the arrow for  its swiftness, nor the warrior for his 
glory. I love only that which they defend: the city of the Men  of  N®menor;  
and I would have  her loved for her memory,  her ancientry, her  beauty, and  
her present wisdom. Not feared, save  as men may fear the  dignity of a man, 
old and wise. 
     'So  fear me not! I do not ask you to tell me  more.  I do not even ask  
you to tell me  whether I now speak nearer the  mark. But if you  will trust  
me,  it may  be that I can advise  you in your present  quest, whatever that 
be-yes, and even aid you.' 
     Frodo made no  answer. Almost he  yielded to  the  desire for  help and 
counsel, to tell this grave young man, whose words  seemed so wise and fair, 
all that was in his mind. But something  held him back. His heart  was heavy  
with fear and sorrow: if he and Sam  were indeed, as seemed likely, all that 
was now left of the Nine Walkers, then he was  in sole command of the secret 
of their errand. Better mistrust undeserved  than rash words. And the memory 
of Bor omir, of the dreadful change that the  lure of the Ring had  worked in 
him, was very present to his mind, when he looked at Faramir and listened to 
his voice: unlike they were, and yet also much akin. 
     They walked on in  silence for a  while,  passing  like grey and  green 
shadows under  the old trees,  their feet  making no  sound; above them many 
birds sang, and the sun glistened on the polished roof of dark leaves in the 
evergreen woods of Ithilien. 
     Sam had taken no part in  the conversation, though he had listened; and 
at the same time he had attended with his keen hobbit ears to  all  the soft  
woodland noises about them. One thing he had noted, that in all the talk the 
name of Gollum had not once come up. He was glad, though he felt that it was 
too much to hope that he would never  hear  it again. He soon  became  aware 
also that though they  walked alone, there  were many men close at hand: not 
only Damrod and Mablung flitting in and out of the shadows ahead, but others 
on either side, all making their swift secret way to some appointed place. 
     Once,  looking suddenly back,  as if some prickle of the skin told  him 
that he  was watched from behind, he  thought he caught a brief glimpse of a  
small dark shape slipping behind a  tree-trunk. He opened his mouth to speak 
and shut it again. `I'm not sure of it,' he said to himself, 'and why should 
I remind them of the old villain, if  they choose to  forget  him? I wish  I 
could!' 
     So they passed on,  until the woodlands grew thinner and the land began 

####-to fall more steeply.  Then they turned aside again, to the right,  and came 
quickly  to a  small river in a narrow  gorge:  it was the  same stream that 
trickled  far  above out of  the round pool, now grown  to  a swift torrent, 
leaping down over many stones in a deep-cloven bed,  overhung  with ilex and 
dark box-woods. Looking west they could see,  below them in a haze of light, 
lowlands and broad meads, and glinting far off in the westering sun the wide  
waters of the Anduin. 
     'Here, alas! I must do you  a discourtesy,' said  Faramir.  "I hope you  
will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way to courtesy as 
not  to  slay you or to bind  you. But it is a command that no stranger, not 
even one of Rohan that fights  with  us, sha ll  see the path we now  go with 
open eyes. I must blindfold you.' 
     `As you will,' said  Frodo. 'Even the Elves  do  likewise  at need, and 
blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlurien. Gimli  the dwarf took  
it ill, but the hobbits endured it.' 
     `It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,' said Faramir. 'But I 
am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force.' 
     He called softly  and immediately Mablung and Damrod stepped out of the 
trees  and  came  back  to  him.  'Blindfold  these guests,'  said  Faramir. 
`Securely, but not so as to discomfort  them. Do not  tie  their hands. They 
will  give their word not to try and see.  I  could trust them to shut their 
eyes of their  own accord, but  eyes will blink, if  the  feet stumble. Lead 
them so that they do not falter.' 
     With green scarves the  two guards  now bound up the hobbits'  eyes and 
drew their hoods down almost  to their mouths; then  quickly  they took each 
one by  the hand and went on their way. All that Frodo and Sam knew of  this 
last mile of the road they learned from guessing in the dark. After a little 
they found that  they were  on a  path descending  steeply; soon  it grew so 
narrow that they went in  single file, brushing a stony wall on either side; 
their  guards steered them  from  behind with  hands  laid  firmly on  their 
shoulders. Now and again they came  to  rough  places  and were  lifted from 
their feet for a  while,  and then  set down again. Always  the noise of the 
running water  was  on their right hand, and it grew  nearer and louder.  At 
length  they  were  halted.  Quickly Mablung and  Damrod turned them  about, 
several times, and they lost all sense of direction. They climbed  upwards a  
little: it seemed cold and the noise  of the stream had become  faint.  Then 
they were picked up  and carried down, down many steps, and round a  corner. 

####-Suddenly they heard  the water again, loud now,  rushing and  splashing. All 
round them it seemed, and  they felt a fine rain  on their hands and cheeks. 
At last they were set on their  feet once  more. For a moment they stood so, 
half fearful, blindfold, not knowing where they were; and no one spoke. 
     Then came the voice of Faramir close behind. `Let  them see! ' he said. 
The scarves  were  removed and  their hoods drawn back, and they blinked and 
gasped. 
     They stood on a wet floor of polished  stone, the doorstep, as it were, 
of a rough-hewn gate of rock opening dark behind them. But  in  front a thin 
veil  of water was hung, so  near that Frodo cou ld  have put an outstretched 
arm into it. It  faced westward. The level shafts  of the setting sun behind 
beat  upon it, and the red  light was broken  into many flickering  beams of 
ever -changing  colour. It  was as if  they  stood  at  the  window  of  some 
elven-tower, curtained with threaded  jewels  of silver and  gold, and ruby, 
sapphire and amethyst, all kindled with an unconsuming fire. 
     'At least by good chance we  came at the  right hour  to reward you for  
your patience,' said Faramir.  `This is the  Window  of the Sunset,  Henneth 
Annyn,  fairest  of all the falls of Ithilien, land  of  many fountains. Few 
strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall behind to match it. 
Enter now and see! ' 
     Even as he spoke the sun sank, and the fire faded in the flowing water.  
They  turned and passed under  the low forbidding  arch. At  once they found 
themselves in a rock -chamber, wide and rough, with an  uneven stooping roof.  
A  few torches were kindled  and cast a dim  light on the  glisten ing walls.  
Many men were already there. Others were  still coming in by twos and threes 
through a dark narrow door on one side. As their eyes grew accustomed to the 
gloom the hobbits saw that the cave was larger than they had guessed and was 
filled with gr eat store of arms and victuals.  
     'Well, here is  our refuge,'  said Faramir. `Not a place of  great ease 
but here you may pass  the night in peace. It is dry at least,  and there is 
food, though no fire. At one  time the water flowed  down  through this cave 
and out  of the  arch, but its  course was changed further  up the gorge, by 
workmen  of old, and the stream sent down in a fall  of  doubled height over  
the rocks  far above.  All the ways  into this grot were then sealed against  
the entry of water   or aught else, all save one. There are now but  two ways 
out:  that passage yonder by which you entered  blindfold,  and  through the  
Window-curtain into  a deep  bowl  filled  with knives of  stone. Now rest a  

####-while, until the evening meal is set.' 
     The hobbits  were taken to a corner and given a  low bed to lie on,  if 
they wished. Meanwhile  men busied themselves about the cave, quietly and in 
orderly  quickness. Light  tables  were taken from the walls and  set  up on 
trestles and laden  with gear .  This was plain and unadorned  for  the  most 
part,  but  all well and fairly,  made:  round platters, bowls and dishes of 
glazed brown clay or turned box-wood, smooth and clean. Here and there was a  
cup or basin of polished bronze; and a goblet of plain  silver was set by the 
Captain's seat in the middle of the inmost table. 
     Faramir went about  among the men, questioning each as he came in, in a  
soft  voice. Some came back from the pursuit of  the Southrons; others, left  
behind as scouts near the roa d, came in latest. All  the Southrons  had been 
accounted for, save  only the  great mymak:  what happened to him none could 
say. Of the enemy no movement could be seen; not even an orc-spy was 
abroad. 
     'You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?' Faramir asked of the latest comer. 
     `Well, no, lord,' said the man. `No Orc at least. But I saw, or thought 
I saw,  something a little strange. It was getting deep dusk, when the  eyes 
make things greater than they should be. So perhaps it may have been no more 
than a squirrel.' Sam pricked up  his ears at this.  'Yet if  so,  it  was a  
black squirrel, and I saw no tail. 'Twas like a shadow on the ground, and it 
whisked behind a tree-trunk when  I drew  nigh and went up aloft as swift as 
any squirrel could.  You wi ll not have us  slay wild  beasts for no purpose, 
and it  seemed  no  more, so I  tried  no arrow.  It was too  dark for  sure 
shooting anyway, and the creature was gone into the gloom of the leaves in a 
twinkling.  But  I stayed  for a  while, for  it seemed strange, and then  I 
hastened back. I  thought I heard the thing hiss at me from high above as  I 
turned away.  A large squirrel,  maybe.  Perhaps  under  the  shadow of  the 
Unnamed  some of the beasts of Mirkwood are  wandering hither to our  
woods. 
They have black squirrels there, 'tis said.' 
     `Perhaps,' said Faramir. `But that would be an ill omen, if it were so. 
We do  not want the  escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien.'  Sam  fancied that he  
gave a swift glance towards the hobbits as he  spoke; but Sam  said nothing.  
For a  while he and Frodo lay back and watched the torchlight, and  the  men 
moving  to and  fro  speaking in  hushed  voices. Then  suddenly  Frodo fell  
asleep. 

####-     Sam  struggled with himself, arguing this  way and that. `He may be a ll 
right,' he  thought, 'and then  he  may  not.  Fair  speech may hide  a foul 
heart.' He yawned. `I could sleep for a week, and I'd be better  for it. And 
what  can  I do, if I do  keep  awake, me all alone, and all these great Men 
about? Nothing, Sam Gamgee; but you've got to keep awake  all the same.' And 
somehow he managed it. The light faded from the cave door, and the grey veil 
of falling water grew dim and was lost in gathering shadow. Always the sound 
of the water went on, never changing its note, morning or evening  or night.  
It murmured and whispered of sleep. Sam stuck his knuckles in his eyes. 
     Now more torches  were being  lit. A cask of wine was broached. Storage 
barrels were being opened. Men were  fetching water from the fall. Some were 
laving  their hands  in  basins. A  wide copper bowl and  a white cloth were 
brought to Faramir and he washed. 
     `Wake our guests,' he said, `and take them water. It is time to eat.' 
     Frodo sat  up and yawned and  stretched.  Sam, not used to being waited 
on, looked with some surprise at the tall man who bowed, holding a basin  of 
water before him. 
     'Put it on the ground, master, if you please! ' he said. 'Easier for me 
and you.' Then to  the astonishment and amusement of  the Men he plunged his 
head into the cold water and splashed his neck and ears.  
     'Is it the custom  in  your land to wash the head before supper? ' said 
the man who waited on the hobbits.  
     `No, before  breakfast,' said Sam. `But  if  you're short of sleep cold 
water on the neck's like  rain  on a wilted lettuce.  There! Now  I can keep 
awake long enough to eat a bit.' 
     They were led then to seats beside Faramir: barrels  covered with pelts 
and high enough above the  benches of the Men  for their convenience. Before 
they ate,  Faramir  and all  his  men turned  and faced west in  a moment of 
silence. Faramir signed to Frodo and Sam that they should do likewise. 
     'So we always do.' he  said, as they sat down: `we look towards N®menor 
that  was,  and beyond to  Elvenhome that is, and  to  that which  is beyond 
Elvenhome and will ever be. Have you no such custom at meat? ' 
     `No,' said  Frodo,  feeling  strangely rustic and untutored. `But if we 
are guests, we bow to  our host, and  after we have eaten we rise  and thank 
him.' 
     'That we do also,' said Faramir. 
     After so long  journeying  and  camping, and  days spent ¤n  the lonely 

####-wild, the evening meal seemed a feast  to the hobbits:  to drink pale yellow 
wine, cool and  fragrant,  and eat bread  and butter, and salted  meats, and 
dried fruits,  and good red cheese, with clean  hands and clean  knives  and 
plates. Neither Frodo  nor  Sam  refused  anything that was  offered,  nor a  
second, nor indeed a  third helping.  The  wine coursed in their  veins  and 
tired limbs, and they felt glad and easy of heart as they had not done since 
they left the land of Lurien. 
     When all was done Faramir led them to a recess at the back of the cave, 
partly screened by curtains; and a chair and two stools were brought  there. 
A little earthenware lamp burned in a niche. 
     `You may soon desire to sleep,' he said, 'and especially good  Samwise, 
who would not close his eyes before he ate -- whether for  fear  of blunting 
the edge of  a noble hunger, or for fear of me, I do not know. But it is not 
good to sleep too soon after meat, and that following a fast. Let  us talk a  
while. On your journey from  Rivendell there must have  been many  things to 
tell.  And you, too,  would perhaps wish to learn  something of  us and  the 
lands where  you  now  are.  Tell me  of  Boromir my  brother,  and  of  old 
Mithrandir, and of the fair people of Lothlurien.' 
     Frodo no longer felt  sleepy and he was willing to talk. But though the 
food and wine had put  him at his ease, he had not lost all his caution. Sam 
was beaming  and humming  to himself, but when  Frodo  spoke he was at first  
content to  listen,  only occasionally venturing  to  make an exclamation of 
agreement. 
     Frodo told many tales,  yet always he  steered the matter away from the 
quest of the Company and from the Ring, enlarging rather on the valiant part 
Boromir had played in all their adventures. with the  wolves of the wild, in 
the snows  under Caradhras, and in  the  mines of Moria  where Gandalf fell.  
Faramir was most moved by the story of the fight on the bridge. 
     `It must have irked Boromir to  run  from Orcs,' he said, `or even from 
the  fell thing you name,  the  Balrog  -- even  though he was the  last  to 
leave.' 
     `He was the last,' said  Frodo, 'but Aragorn was forced to lead us.  He 
alone  knew the way after  Gandalf's fall. But had there  not been us lesser  
folk to care for, I do not think that either he or Boromir would have fled.' 
     `Maybe, it  would  have been  better  had  Boromir  fallen  ther e  with 
Mithrandir,' said Faramir,  `and not gone on  to  the fate that waited above 
the falls of Rauros.' 

####-     'Maybe. But tell me  now of your own fortunes,' said Frodo, turning the 
matter  aside  once  again.  `For I  would  learn more  of Minas  Ithil  and 
Osgiliath, and  Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What  hope have you for that 
city in your long war? ' 
     'What hope have we? '  said Faramir. 'It is long since we had any hope. 
The  sword  of Elendil, if it  returns indeed, may rekindle it, but I do not 
think  that it will  do  more than put off the evil  day,  unless other help 
unlooked-for also comes, from Elves or  Men.  For the Enemy increases and we 
decrease. We are a failing people, a springless autumn. 
     `The Men of N®menor were settled far and wide on the shores and seaward 
regions  of the Great Lands, but for the  most part they fell into evils and 
follies. Many became enamoured of the Darkness and the black arts; some 
were 
given over wholly to  idleness and  ease, and some fought among  themselves,  
until they were conquered in their weakness by the wild men. 
     `It is not  said  that evil arts were ever practised in Gondor, or that 
the Nameless One  was ever named in  honour there;  and the  old wisdom  and 
beauty brought  out of  the West remained long in the realm of  the sons  of 
Elendil  the Fair, and they linger  there still.  Yet even so  it was Gondor  
that brought  about  its  own decay,  falling by  degrees  into dotage,  and 
thinking that the Enemy was asleep, who was only banished not destroyed. 
     'Death was ever present, because the N®menoreans still,  as they had in 
their old kingdom,  and so lost it,  hungered after endless life unchanging. 
Kings made tombs more  splendid than  houses of the living. and counted  old 
names in the rolls of their descent dearer than the names of sons. Childless 
lords sat in aged halls musing on heraldry; in  secret chambers withered men  
compounded  strong  elixirs, or  in high cold  towers asked questions of the 
stars. And the last king of the line of Anbrion had no heir. 
     `But  the  stewards  were wiser  and more  fortunate. Wiser,  for  they 
recruited the strength  of our people from the sturdy folk of the sea -coast, 
and from the hardy mountaineers of Ered  Nimrais. And they made a truce with 
the proud peoples of the  North,  who  often had assailed us, men of  fierce 
valour, but our kin from afar  off, unlike the wild Easterlings or the cruel 
Haradrim. 
     'So it came to  pass in the days of Cirion the Twelfth Steward  (and my 
father is the sit and twentieth) that they rode  to our aid and at the great 
Field  of Celebrant they  destroyed our enemies that had seized our northern 

####-provinces. These are the Rohirrim,  as we name them, masters  of horses, and 
we ceded to them the fields of Calenardhon  that are since called Rohan; for  
that province  had  long been sparsely peopled. And they became  our allies,  
and have  ever  proved true  to us,  aiding us  at  need,  and  guarding our 
northern marches and the Gap of Rohan. 
     `Of our  lore and manners they have learned what they would,  and their 
lords speak our speech at need; yet for  the most part they hold by the ways 
of their  own  fathers and  to their  own  memories, and  they  speak  among 
themselves  their own North  tongue. And  we  love them: tall men  and  fair  
women,  valiant  both  alike, golden-haired, bright-eyed,  and strong;  they 
remind us of the youth of Men, as they were in the  Elder Days. Indeed it is 
said by our lore-masters that they  have from of  old  this affinity with us 
that they  are  come  from those same  Three  Houses  of  Men  as  were  the 
N®menoreans  in  their  beginning  not  from  Hador  the  Goldenhaired,  the 
Elf-friend, maybe, yet from such of his sons and people as went not over Sea 
into the West, refusing the call. 
     'For so we reckon Men in our lore, calling them the High, or Men of the 
West, which  were N®menoreans; and  the Middle Peoples, Men of the 
Twilight, 
such as are  the Rohirrim and their kin  that  dwell still far in the North; 
and the Wild, the Men of Darkness.  
     `Yet  now,  if the  Rohirrim are  grown in  some  ways more like to us, 
enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too  have become more like  to them, and 
can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are become Middle Men, of the 
Twilight, but with memory of other things.  For  as the Rohirrim do, we  now 
love  war  and valour as things good in themselves, both a sport and an end;  
and  though  we still  hold  that  a  warrior  should have more  skills  and 
knowledge than only the craft of weapons  and slaying, we esteem a  warrior, 
nonetheless, above men  of other  crafts.  Such is the need  of our days. So 
even was  my brother,  Boromir:  a  man of  prowess,  and for  that  he  was 
accounted the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of 
Minas  Tirith has  for long  years  been so hardy  in  toil, so  onward into 
battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.' Faramir sighed and fell 
silent for a while. 
     `You don't say much in all your tales  about the Elves, sir,' said Sam, 
suddenly plucking up courage. He  had noted that Faramir seemed  to refer to 
Elves with reverence, and this even more than his courtesy, and his food and  

####-wine, had won Sam's respect and quieted his suspicions. 
     `No indeed, Master Samwise,' said Faramir, `for  I  am  not  learned in 
Elven-lore. But there you touch upon another point in which we have changed, 
declining from N®menor to  Middle -earth. For as you may know, if  
Mithrandir 
was  your companion and you have spoken with Elrond, the Edain,  the Fathers 
of the  N®menoreans,  fought  beside the  Elves in the first  wars, and were 
rewarded by the gift of the kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight of 
Elvenhome. But in Middle-earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days 
of 
darkness, by the arts of the Enemy, and by the slow changes of time in which 
each  kind  walked  further down  their sundered  roads. Men  now  fear  and  
misdoubt the Elves, and yet know little of them. And we of  Gondor grow like 
other  Men, like  the men of  Rohan; for even they, who are the  foes of the 
Dark Lord, shun the Elves and speak of the Golden Wood with dread. 
     `Yet there are among us still  some  who have dealings  with the  Elves 
when they may, and  ever and anon one will go in secret to  Lurien, seldom to 
return. Not I.  For I deem it perilous now for  mortal man  wilfully to seek  
out the Elder People. Yet I envy you that have spoken with the White Lady.' 
     `The Lady of Lurien!  Galadriel!' cried Sam. `You should see her indeed 
you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening's my job at home, sir, if 
you understand me, and I'm  not much good at poetry  -- not  at making  it: a  
bit of  a comic rhyme, perhaps. now and again, you know, but not real poetry 
-- so I can't tell you what I mean. It ought to  be sung. You'd have  to get 
Strider,  Aragorn that is, or  old Mr. Bilbo, for that.  But I wish  I could 
make a song about her. Beautiful she is, sir! Lovely! Sometimes like a great 
tree  in flower,  sometimes like a white  daffadowndilly,  small and  slender  
like. Hard  as di'monds, soft as moonlight. Warm as sunlight,  cold as frost  
in the stars. Proud and far-off as a snow-mountain, and as merry as any lass 
I  ever saw with daisies  in  her hair in  springtime.  But that's a lot  o' 
nonsense, and all wide of my mark.' 
     'Then she must be lovely indeed,' said Faramir. `Perilously fair.' 
     `I don't know about perilous,' said Sam. `It strikes me that folk takes 
their  peril  with them into Lurien,  and finds  it  there  because  they've 
brought it. But perhaps you could call her perilous, because she's so strong 
in herself. You, you could dash yourself to pieces on her, like a ship on  a  
rock;  or drownd  yourself, like a hobbit in a  river. But  neither rock nor  

####-river would be to blame. Now Boro -- ' He stopped and went red in the face.  
     `Yes? Now Boromir you would say?  ' said Faramir. `What would  you say?  
He took his peril with him? ' 
     `Yes sir, begging your pardon, and a  fine man as your brother was if I 
may say  so.  But  you've  been  warm on  the scent all along. Now I watched 
Boromir  and listened to him, from Rivendell  all down the  road --  looking  
after my master, as you'll understand,  and not meaning any harm to  Boromir 
-- and it's my  opinion that  in Lurien he first  saw clearly what I guessed 
sooner: what  he  wanted.  From the  moment he  first  saw it he  wanted the 
Enemy's Ring! ' 
     `Sam!  '  cried Frodo  aghast. He had fallen deep into his own thoughts 
for a while, and came out of them suddenly and too late. 
     'Save me! ' said Sam turning white, and then flushing scarlet. `There I 
go  again!  When ever  you open your big mouth you put your foot  in it  the 
Gaffer used to say to me, and right enough. O dear, O dear! 
     `Now look here,  sir!  ' He turned, facing up  to Faramir with  all the 
courage  that he  could muster. `Don't you go taking advantage of my  master 
because his servant's no better than a fool. You've spoken very handsome all  
along,  put me off my  guard,  talking of Elves and all. But  handsome is as 
handsome does we say. Now's a chance to show your quality.' 
     'So  it seems,' said Faramir,  slowly and  very  softly, with a strange 
smile.  `So that  is the answer  to all the riddles! The One Ring  that  was 
thought to  have perished  fr om  the world. And Boromir tried to take  it by 
force? And you escaped? And ran all the way -- to me! And here in the wild I 
have  you:  two halflings,  and a host of men at  my  call, and the  Ring of 
Rings. A pretty stroke of fortune!  A chance for Faramir, Captain of Gondor, 
to show his quality! Ha!'  He stood up,  very tall and stern, his  grey eyes 
glinting. 
     Frodo and Sam sprang from their stools and set themselves  side by side 
with their backs  to the wall, fumbling for their sword-hilts.  There was  a 
silence.  All the men in the cave stopped talking and looked towards them in 
wonder. But Faramir sat down  again in his chair and began to laugh quietly,  
and then suddenly became grave again. 
     'Alas  for Boromir! It was too sore a trial!  ' he said. `How you  have 
increased my sorrow, you two  strange wanderers from a  far country, bearing 
the peril of Men! But you are less judges of Men than I of Halflings. We are 
truth-speakers, we men  of Gondor. We boast seldom, and then perform, or die 

####-in the attempt. Not if  I found it  on the  highway would I take it  I said. 
Even if I were such a man as  to desire this thing, and  even though I  knew 
not clearly what  this thing was  when  I spoke, still I should  take  those 
words as a vow, and be held by them. 
     'But I am not such a man. Or I am wise enough  to  know that  there are 
some  perils from which a  man  must  flee.  Sit at peace! And be comforted, 
Samwise. If  you seem to have stumbled, think  that it was  fated to  be so. 
Your heart is shr ewd as  well  as  faithful, and saw clearer than your eyes.  
For  strange though it  may seem,  it was safe to declare this to me. It may 
even help the  master that you love. It shall turn to his good, if it is  in 
my power. So be comforted. But do not even name this thing again aloud. Once 
is enough.' 
     The hobbits came back  to  their seats and sat very  quiet. Men  turned 
back to  their drink and their talk, perceiving  that their captain had  had 
some jest or other with the little guests, and that it was over. 
     'Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,' said Faramir. 'If 
you took this thing on yourself, unwilling, at others' asking, then you have 
pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to keep  it hid and not to use 
it.  You  are a   new people and a new world to me. Are  all your kin of like 
sort? Your  land  must  be a realm  of peace  and content,  and  there  must  
gardeners be in high honour.' 
     `Not all  is  well  there,'  said Frodo, `but  certainly gardeners  are 
honoured.' 
     `But folk  must  grow weary  there, even  in their  gardens, as  do all 
things under the Sun  of this world. And you are far from  home and wayworn. 
No more tonight. Sleep, both  of you -- in peace, if you can. Fear not! I do 
not wish to  see it, or  touch  it, or know more of it than I know (which is 
enough), lest peril perchance waylay  me and I  fall lower  in the test than 
Frodo son of Drogo. Go now to rest -- but  first tell  me only, if you will, 
whither you wish to go,  and  what  to do.  For I  must watch, and  wait, and 
think.  Time passes.  In the morning  we  must each  go swiftly  on the ways 
appointed to us.' 
     Frodo had felt himself trembling as the first shock of fear passed. Now 
a great  weariness came  down on him like  a  cloud. He could dissemble  and 
resist no longer. 
     'I was going to find a way into Mordor,' he said faintly. `I  was going 
to Gorgoroth. I must  find  the Mountain of Fire and cast the thing into the 

####-gulf of Doom. Gandalf said so. I do not think I shall ever get there.' 
     Faramir stared at him for a moment in grave astonishment. Then suddenly 
he caught him as he swayed, and lifting him gently, carried him  to the  bed 
and laid  him there,  and covered him warmly.  At  once he fell into a  deep 
sleep. 
     Another bed  was  set beside him for his  servant. Sam hesitated for  a  
moment, then bowing very low: `Good night, Captain, my lord,' he said.  `You  
took the chance, sir.' 
     `Did I so?' said Faramir. 
     `Yes sir, and showed your quality: the very highest.' 
     Faramir smiled. 'A pert servant, Master Samwise. But nay: the praise of 
the  praiseworthy is above all rewards.  Yet  there  was naught  in  this to 
praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.' 
     `Ah  well,  sir,' said Sam, `you said  my master had an elvish air  and 
that was good and true. But I can say this:  you have an air too, sir,  that 
reminds me of, of  -- well, Gandalf, of wizards.  
     'Maybe,'  said  Faramir. `Maybe you discern from  far away the  air  of 
N®menor. Good n ight!' 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. The Forbidden Pool 

 
 
     Frodo  woke to  find  Faramir bending over him. For a  second old fears 
seized him and he sat up and shrank away. 
     `There is nothing to fear,' said Faramir. 
     'Is it morning already? ' said Frodo yawning. 
     `Not yet, but night is drawing to an end, and the full moon is setting. 
Will  you  come and see it?  Also there  is a matter on which I desire  your 
counsel. I am sorry to rouse you from sleep, but will you come? ' 
     `I will,' said Frodo, rising and shivering a little as he left the warm 
blanket and pelts. It seemed cold in the  fireless  cave. The  noise of  the 
water was loud in the stillness. He put on his cloak and followed Faramir. 
     Sam, waking  suddenly  by some instinct of watchfulness,  saw first his 
master's empty  bed  and  leapt to his feet. Then  he saw  two dark figures, 
Frodo  and a  man, framed  against the archway, which was now filled with  a 
pale  white  light. He  hurried after  them,  past rows of men  sleeping  on 
mattresses along the  wall. As he went by  the  cave-mouth  he saw  that the 
Curtain was now become a dazzling veil of silk and pearls and silver thread: 
melting icicles of moonlight. But he did not pause to admire it, and turning 
aside he followed his  master thr ough the narrow  doorway in the wall of the 
cave. 
     They went first  along a black passage, then up  many wet steps, and so 
came to a small flat  landing cut in the stone  and  lit  by  the pale  sky, 
gleaming  high  above through a  long deep shaft.  From here two flights  of 
steps led: one going on, as it seemed, up on to the high bank of the stream; 
the other turning away to the left. This they  followed. It wound its way up 
like a turret-stair. 
     At last they came out of the stony darkness and looked about. They were 
on a wide  flat rock without rail or parapet. At their right, eastwards, the 
torrent fell, splashing over many terraces, and then,  pouring down  a steep 
race, it filled  a smooth-hewn channel with  a  dark  force of water flecked 
with  foam,  and curling and rushing almost at  their  feet it  plunged sheer  
over the  edge that  yawned  upon their left.  A man  stood  there, near the  
brink, silent, gazing down. 
     Frodo turned to  watch the sleek necks of the  water as they curved and 

####-dived.  Then he lifted his  eyes and gazed far away. The world was quiet and  
cold,  as if dawn were near. Far off in  the West the full moon was sinking, 
round and white. Pale mists shimmered in the  great vale below:  a wide gulf 
of silver fume,  beneath which rolled the cool night-waters of the Anduin. A 
black  darkness  loomed beyond,  and  in  it glinted, here and  there, cold, 
sharp, remote, white as  the teeth of ghosts, the peaks of Ered Nimrais, the 
White Mountains of the Realm of Gondor, tipped with everlasting snow. 
     For a while Frodo  stood  there on  the  high stone, and  a shiver  ran 
through him,  wondering if anywhere in  the vastness  of the night -lands his 
old companions walked  or slept,  or lay dead  shrouded in  mist. Why was he 
brough t here out of forgetful sleep?  
     Sam was eager for  an answer to the same question and could not refrain 
himself from muttering, for  his master's ear alone as  he thought: 'It's  a  
fine view, no doubt, Mr. Frodo, but chilly to the heart, not to mention   the 
bones! What's going on? ' 
     Faramir heard and answered. `Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil as he goes 
from Middle-earth,  glances upon  the white  locks of old Mindolluin.  It is 
worth a few shivers. But that is not what I brought you to see-though as for 
you,  Samwise,  you  were not  brought, and  do but pay  the penalty of your  
watchfulness. A draught of wine shall amend it. Come, look now! ' 
     He  stepped  up beside the silent sentinel on the dark  edge. and Frodo 
followed.  Sam  hung back. He already felt insecure enough on this high  wet 
platform. Faramir and Frodo looked down. Far below them they  saw  the white 
waters pour into  a foaming  bowl, and then  swirl darkly about  a deep oval 
basin in the rocks. until they found  their  way out  again through a narrow 
gate, and  flowed away, fuming  and  chattering, into  calmer and more level 
reaches. The moonlight still slanted down to the  fall's foot and gleamed on 
the ripples of the basin. Presently Frodo was aware of a small dark thing on 
the  near bank,  but  even as he  looked at  it, it  dived and vanished just  
beyond the boil and bubble of the fall, cleaving the  black  water as neatly 
as an arrow or an edgewise stone. 
     Faramir turned to the man at his side. `Now what would you  say that it 
is,  Anborn? A squirrel, or a kingfisher? Are there black kingfishers in the 
night-pools of Mirkwood?  ' 
     `'Tis not a bird, whatever else it  be,' answered  Anborn. `It has four 
limbs and  dives manwise; a pretty mastery of the craft it  shows, too. What 
is it at? Seeking a way  up behind  the Curtain to our hidings?  It seems we 

####-are discovered at last. I have my bow here, and I have posted other archers, 
nigh  as good  marksmen  as myself, on  either bank.  We  wait only for your 
command to shoot , Captain.' 
     `Shall we shoot? ' said Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo. 
     Frodo did not answer  for a moment. Then `No! ' he said. `No! I beg you  
not to.' If Sam had dared, he  would have said `Yes,' quicker and louder. He 
could not see, but  he guessed well  enough from  their words what they were 
looking at. 
     'You  know,  then, what this thing is? '  said Faramir.  `Come, now you  
have  seen,  tell me why it should be  spared. In all our words together you  
have not once  spoken  of your gangrel companion, and I  let him be for  the 
time.  He could  wait till he  was  caught and  brought before me. I sent my 
keenest huntsmen to seek  him, but he slipped them, and they had no sight of 
him till now, save Anborn here, once  at dusk yesterevening. But now  he has 
done worse trespass than  only  to go  coney-snaring in the uplands: he  has 
dared to come to Henneth  Annyn,  and his life is forfeit.  I marvel at  the 
creature: so secret and so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before 
our very window. Does he think  that men sleep without watch all  night? Why 
does he so?' 
     'There are two answers, I think,' said  Frodo. `For one thing, he knows 
little of Men, and sly though he  is, your refuge is so  hidden that perhaps 
he  does  not know that Men are concealed here.  For another, I think  he is 
allured here by a mastering desire, stronger than his caution.' 
     `He is lured here, you  say? ' said  Faramir in  a low voice. `Can  he, 
does he then know of your burden? ' 
     `Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.' 
     'He  bore  it? ' said Faramir, breathing sharply in  his wonder.  `This 
matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it? ' 
     'Maybe. It is precious to him. But I did not speak of that.' 
     `What then does the creature seek? ' 
     `Fish,' said Frodo. `Look! ' 
     They peered down at the dark pool. A little black head  appeared at the 
far end of the basin,  just out of the deep shadow of the rocks. There was a  
brief silver glint, and a swirl  of tiny ripples. It swam to  the side,  and 
then with  marvellous agility a froglike figure climbed out of the water and 
up the bank. At once it sat down and began to gnaw at the small silver thing  
that glittered  as it  turned:  the  last rays of the moon  were now  falling 

####-behind the stony wall at the pool's end. 
     Faramir  laughed softly.  `Fish! '  he said.  `It  is  a less  perilous 
hunger. Or maybe not: fish from  the pool of Henneth Annyn  may cost him all 
he has to give.' 
     `Now I have him at the arrow-point,' said Anborn. `Shall  I not  shoot, 
Captain? For coming unbidden to this place death is our law.' 
     `Wait, Anborn,'  said Faramir.  `This is a harder matter than it seems. 
What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we spare? ' 
     `The creature is wretched and hungry,' said Frodo, `and unaware of  his 
danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he  would have  bidden you not to slay 
him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the Elves to do so. I do not 
know clearly why, and  of what I guess I cannot  speak openly out  here. But 
this creature is in some way bound up with my errand. Until you found us and 
took us, he was my guide.' 
     `Your guide! ' said Faramir. `The matter becomes ever stranger. I would 
do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let this sly wanderer go 
free at his own will from here, to join you later if it please him, or to be 
caught by  Orcs and tell all he knows under threat of pain. He must be slain 
or taken. Slain, if he be not taken very swiftly. But how can  this slippery 
thing of many guises be caught, save by a feathered shaft?  ' 
     `Let me go  down quietly to him,' said Frodo. `You  may keep  your bows 
bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.' 
     `Go  then and be swift! ' said Faramir. `If  he  comes  off  alive,  he 
should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead Frodo  
down to the bank, Anborn, and go softly. The thing has a nose and ears. Give 
me your bow.' 
     Anborn grunted and led the way down the winding  sta ir to the  landing, 
and then up the other stair, until  at  last they  came to a narrow  opening 
shrouded with thick bushes. Passing silently through, Frodo found himself on 
the top of  the southern bank above the pool. It  was now dark and the falls 
were  pale and grey,  reflecting only the lingering moonlight of the western 
sky. He could not see Gollum. He went forward  a  short way and Anborn  
came 
softly behind him. 
     `Go on!  ' he breathed in  Frodo's ear.  `Have a care to your right. If 
you  fall in the pool, then no one but your fishing friend can help you. And 
forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you may not see them.' 

####-     Frodo crept forward, using his hands Gollum-like to feel his way and to 
steady himself.  The rocks  were  for  the  most part  flat  and smooth  but 
slippery.  He halted listening.  At first he  could  hear  no sound but  the 
unceasing  rush of  the  fall behind him. Then presently he  heard,  not far 
ahead, a hissing murmur. 
     'Fissh, nice fissh. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last, yes.  
Now we can eat fish in  peace. No, not in peace,  precious. For Precious  is 
lost; yes, lost. Dirty hobbits, nasty hobbits. Gone and left us, gollum; and 
Precious is gone.  Only poor  Smjagol all  alone.  No Preciou s.  Nasty  Men,  
they'll  take  it,  steal my Precious. Thieves.  We  hates them. Fissh, nice 
fissh: Makes  us  strong.  Makes eyes bright,  fingers  tight, yes. Throttle 
them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if we gets chances. Nice fissh. Nice 
fissh!  ' 
     So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall,  only  interrupted 
by  a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo  shivered, listening with 
pity and disgust. He wished it would stop, and that he  never need hear that 
voice again. Anborn  was  not far behind. He  could creep back and ask him to 
get the huntsmen  to shoot.  They  would probably get  close  enough,  while 
Gollum was gorging and off his guard. Only one true shot, and Frodo would be 
rid of the miserable voice  for ever. But no, Gollum had a claim on him now. 
The  servant has a  claim on the master  for service, even  service in fear. 
They  would have foundered  in the Dead Marshes but for  Gollum. Frodo 
knew, 
too, somehow, quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished it. 
     `Smjagol! ' he said softly. 
     `Fissh, nice fissh,' said the voice. 
     `Smjagol! ' he said, a little louder. The voice stopped. 
     `Smjagol,  Master  has come to  look  for  you. Master  is here.  Come, 
Smjagol! ' There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of intaken breath. 
     'Come, Smjagol! ' said Frodo. `We are in danger.  Men will kill you, if 
they find  you  here. Come quickly, if you  wish  to escape  death.  Come to 
Master!' 
     'No!' said the  voice.  `Not nice Master. Leaves  poor Smjagol and goes 
with new friends. Master can wait. Smjagol hasn't finished.' 
     `There's no time,' said Frodo. `Bring fish with you. Come! ' 
     `No! Must finish fish.' 
     'Smjagol! ' said Frodo desperately. 'Precious  will be angry.  I  shall 

####-take Precious, and I shall say: make  him swallow the bones and choke. Never  
taste fish again. Come, Precious is waiting! ' 
     There  was  a sharp  hiss.  Presently  out of  the darkness Gollum came 
crawling  on all  fours,  like  an  erring  dog  called  to  heel. He had   a 
half-eaten fish  in  his  mouth  and another  in his hand. He came  close to 
Frodo, almost nose to nose, and sniffed at him.  His pale eyes were shining. 
Then he took the fish out of his mouth and stood up. 
     `Nice Master! ' he whispered. `Nice  hobb it, come back to poor Smjagol. 
Good Smjagol comes. Now let's go, go quickly, yes. Through the  trees, while 
the Faces are dark. Yes, come let's go! ' 
     `Yes,  we'll go soon,' said Frodo. `But not at once. I will go with you  
as  I promised. I promise aga in.  But  not now. You are not safe yet. I will  
save you, but you must trust me.' 
     `We  must trust  Master? ' said Gollum doubtfully.  'Why? Why not go at 
once? Where is the other one, the cross rude hobbit? Where is he?' 
     'Away up there,' said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. 'I am not going 
without him. We must go back to him.' His heart sank. This was too much like 
trickery.  He did not  really fear that  Faramir would allow  Gollum  to  be 
killed, but  he would probably make him prisoner and bind him; and certainly 
what Frodo did would seem a treachery to  the poor  treacherous creature. It  
would  probably be impossible ever to  make  him understand  or believe that 
Frodo had saved his life in the only way he could. What else could he do? -- 
to keep faith,  as  near  as might be, with both sides. `Come!' he said. `Or 
the Precious will be angry. We are  going back now, up the stream. Go on, go 
on, you go in front! ' 
     Gollum crawled along close to the brink for a little way, snuffling and 
suspicious. Presently he stopped and raised his head. `Something's  there! ' 
he  said.  `Not a  hobbit.'  Suddenly  he turned  back.  A  green  light was 
flickering in  his  bulging  eyes.  `Masster, masster!'  he hissed. 'Wicked!  
Tricksy! False!' He spat and stretched out his long arms with white snapping 
fingers.  
     At that moment the great black shape of Anborn loomed up behind him and 
came down  on him. A large strong hand took him in the nape of the neck  and 
pinned him. He  twisted round  like lightning,   all wet and slimy as he was,  
wriggling like an eel, biting  and  scratching like  a cat. But two more men 
came up out of the shadows. 
     'Hold still!  '  said one. `Or we'll stick  you  as full  of pins as  a  

####-hedgehog. Hold still!' 
     Gollum  went limp, and began to whine and weep. They tied him, none too 
gently. 
     `Easy, easy! ' said Frodo. `He has no strength to match you. Don't hurt 
him, if you can help it. He'll be quieter, if you don't. Smjagol! They won't  
hurt you. I'll go with you, and you shall  come to no  harm. Not unless they 
kill me too. Trust Master! ' 
     Gollum turned and spat at him. The men picked  him up, put  a hood over  
his eyes, and carried him off. 
     Frodo  followed them, feeling  very wretched.  They  went  through  the 
opening behind the bushes. and back, down the stairs  and passages, into the 
cave. Two or three  torches  had been lit. Men were stirring. Sam was there,  
and he gave a queer look at the limp bundle that the men carried. `Got him?' 
he said to Frodo. 
     'Yes. Well no, I didn't get him. He  came to me, because  he trusted me 
at  first, I'm afraid.  I did not want him tied up like this. I hope it will 
be all right; but I hate the whole business.' 
     `So  do I,' said Sam. `And nothing will ever  be all  right  where that 
piece of misery is.' 
     A man came and beckoned to the  hobbits, and took them to the recess at 
the back of the cave. Faramir was sitting there in  his  chair, and the lamp 
had been  rekindled  in its  niche above his head. He signed to them  to  sit 
down  on the  stools beside him. `Bring wine for the guests,'  he said. `And 
bring the prisoner to me.' 
     The wine was brought, and then  Anborn came carrying Gollum. He 
removed 
the cover from  Gollum's head and set him on his feet standing behind him to 
support him. Gollum blinked, hooding the malice of his eyes with their heavy 
pale lids. A  very miserable creature he looked, dripping and dank, smelling  
of fish (he still clutched one in his  hand); his sparse locks were  hanging 
like rank weed over his bony brows, his nose was snivelling. 
     `Loose us! Loose us! '  he said.  `The  cord hurts us, yes it does,  it 
hurts us, and we've done nothing.' 
     `Nothing? ' said  Faramir, looking at the wretched creature with a keen 
glance, but  without any expression in his face either of anger, or pity, or 
wonder. 'Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of 
worse 

####-punishment? However, that  is not for me to judge, happily. But tonight  you  
have  come  where  it  is  death to come. The fish of this  pool  are dearly 
bought.' 
     Gollum dropped the fish from his hand. `Don't want fish,' he said. 
     'The  price  is not set on the fish,' said  Faramir. `Only to come here 
and look on the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared you so far at 
the  prayer  of Frodo here, who says that  of him at least you have deserved 
some thanks. But you must also satisfy me. What is  your name? Whence do 
you 
come? And whither do you go? What is your business?  ' 
     `We are  lost, lost,' said  Gollum. 'No name, no business, no Precious, 
nothing. Only empty. Only hungry; yes, we  are hungry. A  few little fishes,  
nasty bony little fishes, for a  poor creature, and they say  death. So wise 
they are; so just, so very just.' 
     'Not very wise,' said Faramir.  'But just: yes perhaps, as just  as our 
little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo! ' Faramir  took a small  nail-knife 
from his belt and  handed it to Frodo. Gollum misunderstanding  the gesture,  
squealed and fell down. 
     'Now, Smjagol! ' said Frodo.  'You must trust me. I will not desert you. 
Answer truthfully, if you can.  It will  do you  good not  harm.' He cut the 
cords on Gollum's wrists and ankles and raised him to his feet. 
     'Come hither! ' said Faramir. `Look at me! Do you know the name of this 
place? Have you been here before? ' 
     Slowly Gollum  raised his eyes and  looked  unwillingly into Faramir's.  
All light went out of them, and they stared bleak and pale for a moment into 
the clear unwavering  eyes of the man of Gondor. There  was a still silence. 
Then Gollum dropped his  head and shrank down, until he was squatting on the 
floor,  shivering.  'We  doesn't  know  and we  doesn't want  to  know,'  he  
whimpered. `Never came here; never come again.' 
     `There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and dark rooms 
behind them,' said Faramir. `But in this I judge  that you speak  the truth. 
It is well  for you. What oath will  you swear never to return; and never to 
lead any living creature hither by word or sign?' 
     `Master knows,'  said Gollum with a  sidelong glance at Frodo. `Yes, he 
knows. We will promise Master, if he saves us. We'll promise to It, yes.' He 
crawled  to Frodo's feet.  'Save  us,  nice Master!  '  he whined.  `Smjagol 
promises to Precious, promises faithfully. Never come again, never speak, no 

####-never! No, precious, no!' 
     `Are you satisfied? ' said Faramir. 
     `Yes,' said Frodo.  'At least, you must  either  accept this promise or 
carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if he came  to  
me, he should not be harmed. And I would not be proved faithless.' 
     Faramir sat for a moment in thought. `Very good,' he  said at last.  `I  
surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him declare what he 
will do with you! ' 
     'But, Lord Faramir,' said Frodo bowing, `you have not yet declared your 
will  concerning  the said Frodo, and until  that is  made known, he  cannot 
shape his plans for himself  or his companions. Your judgement was postponed 
until the morning; but that is now at hand.' 
     `Then I  will declare my doom,' said Faramir. `As for you, Frodo, in so 
far as lies in me under higher  authority, I declare you  free in  the realm 
of, Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only that neither you  
nor any that go with you have leave to come  to  this  place unbidden.  This 
doom  shall  stand for a  year and a day, and  then cease,  unless you shall 
before that term come to Minas Tirith and present yourself to  the  Lord and  
Steward of the City. Then I will entreat him to confirm what I have done and 
to make  it  lifelong.  In the  meantime,  whomsoever  you  take  under your  
protection shall be under my protection  and under the shield of Gondor. Are 
you answered? ' 
     Frodo bowed low. 'I am answered,' he  said, `and I place myself at your 
service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.' 
     `It is  of  great  worth,' said  Faramir.  'And  now, do you  take this 
creature, this Smjagol, under your protection? ' 
     `I  do  take  Smjagol under  my  protection,' said  Frodo.  Sam  sighed 
audibly;  and  not  at  the courtesies, of which, as  any  hobbit  would, he 
thoroughly approved. Indeed in the Shire such a matter would have required a  
great many more words and bows.  
     'Then I say  to you,'  said Faramir, turning to  Gollum, 'you  are under  
doom of  death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part. Yet 
if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without him, the doom shall 
fall. And may death find  you swiftly, within Gondor  or  without,  if you do 
not well serve him. Now answer me: whither would you go? You were his 
guide, 
he says. Whither were you leading him? ' Gollum made no reply. 

####-     `This I will not  have secret,'  said Faramir. `Answer me,  or  I  will 
reverse my judgement! ' Still Gollum did not answer. 
     `I will answer for him,' said Frodo. `He brought  me to the Black Gate, 
as I asked; but it was impassable.' 
     `There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,' said Faramir. 
     `Seeing this, we  turned aside and came by  the Southward road '  Frodo 
continued; 'for he said that there is, or there may be, a path near to Minas 
Ithil.' 
     `Minas Morgul,' said Faramir. 
     `I do not know clearly,' said Frodo; `but the path  climbs, I think, up 
into  the mountains  on the  northern side of that vale  where  the old city 
stands. It goes up to a high cleft and so down to -- that which is beyond.' 
     `Do you know the name of that high pass? ' said Faramir. 
     'No,' said Frodo. 
     'It is  called Cirith Ungol.' Gollum hissed sharply and began muttering 
to himself. `Is not that its name? ' said Faramir turning to him. 
     `No! '  said  Gollum, and then he squealed, as if something had stabbed 
him. 'Yes, yes, we heard the name once. But what does the name matter to us? 
Master  says he must get in. So we must try some way. There is no  other way 
to try, no.' 
     'No  other way?  ' said  Faramir. `How do  you  know  that? And who has 
explored  all  the  confines  of  that  dark  realm? '  He  looked long  and 
thoughtfully at Gollum. Presently he spoke  again. `Take this creature away, 
Anborn. Treat  him gently, but watch  him.  And do not you,  Smjagol, try to 
dive into the falls.  The rocks  have such  teeth  there  as would  slay you  
before your time. Leave us now and take your fish! ' 
     Anborn  went out  and Gollum went cringing before him.  The curtain was 
drawn across the recess.  
     `Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,' said Faramir.  `I do not 
think you should go with this creature. It is wicked.' 
     'No, not altogether wicked,' said Frodo. 
     'Not wholly, perhaps,' said Faramir; 'but malice eats it like a canker, 
and the  evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you will part with 
him, I will give him safe-conduct and guidance to  any  point on the borders 
of Gondor that he may name.' 
     `He would not take  it,' said  Frodo.  'He would  follow after me as he 
long  has  done.  And I  have  promised  many  times  to  take him under  my  

####-protection  and to go where he led. You would not ask me to break faith with 
him?' 
     'No,'  said  Faramir. `But my  heart would. For it  seems less  evil to 
counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially if  one 
sees a friend bound unwitting to his own  harm. But no  -- if he will go with 
you, you must  now endure him. But I do not think  you are  holden to go  to 
Cirith  Ungol, of which  he has told you  less than  he  knows. That much  I 
perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to Cirith Ungol!' 
     `Where then shall  I  go?  ' said   Frodo.  `Back  to the Black Gate and 
deliver  myself  up  to the guard? What do  you know against this place that 
makes its name so dreadful? ' 
     `Nothing certain,' said Faramir. 'We of Gondor do not ever pass east of 
the Road in these days, and none of us younger men has ever done so, nor has 
any  of us  set foot upon the  Mountains of Shadow. Of them we know only old 
report and the  rumour of bygone  days. But there  is some  dark terror that 
dwells in the  passes above Minas Morgul. If Cirith Ungol  is named, old men 
and masters of lore will blanch and fall silent. 
     ,The valley  of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago, and it was 
a menace  and  a  dread while the banished  Enemy dwelt  yet far  away,  and 
Ithilien was still for the most par t in our keeping.  As you know, that city 
was once a strong place, proud and fair, Minas Ithil, the twin sister of our 
own city.  But it was taken by fell men whom the Enemy in his first strength 
had dominated, and who wandered homeless and masterless  aft er his fall.  It 
is said  that  their lords  were  men of  N®menor  who had fallen  into dark 
wickedness; to them the Enemy had  given rings of power, and he had 
devoured 
them: living ghosts  they were become, terrible  and  evil. After  his going 
they took Minas  Ithil and  dwelt  there,  and they  filled  it, and all the 
valley about, with decay: it seemed empty  and was  not so,  for a shapeless 
fear  lived  within the ruined walls. Nine Lords there  were, and after  the 
return  of their Master, which they aided and prepared  in secret, they grew 
strong again.  Then the Nine Riders issued forth from  the  gates of horror, 
and we could not withstand them. Do not approach their  citadel. You will be 
espied. It  is a place of  sleepless malice, full of lidless eyes. Do not go 
that way!  ' 
     'But where else will you direct me? ' said Frodo. 'You cannot yourself,  
you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over  them. But over the mountains I 

####-am bound, by solemn  undertaking to the  Council, to find a way or perish in 
the seeking. And if  I turn back, refusing the road in its bitter end, where 
then  shall I go  among Elves or Men? Would you have  me come to Gondor 
with 
this Thing, the Thing  that drove your  brother mad with  desire? What spell  
would it work in Minas Tirith?  Shall  there be two  cities of Minas Morgul,  
grinning at each other across a dead land filled with rottenness? ' 
     `I would not have it so,' said Faramir. 
     `Then what would you have me do? ' 
     `I know not. Only I would not have you go to death or to torment. And I 
do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way.' 
     'Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can find.  And there 
is no time for long searching,' said Frodo. 
     `It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,'  said  Faramir.  'But at the 
least,  remember my  warning:  beware  of this guide,  Smjagol.  He has done 
murder before now. I read it in him.' He sighed. 
     `Well, so we meet and  part,  Frodo son of Drogo. You have no  need  of 
soft words: I do  not hope to see you again on any other day under this Sun. 
But you shall go  now with my blessing upon you,  and upon  all your people. 
Rest a little while food is prepared for you. 
     'I would gladly learn how this creeping Smjagol became possessed of the 
Thing of which we speak, and how he lost it, but I will not trouble you now.  
If ever beyond  hope you return to the lands of the living and we retell our 
tales, sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing at  old  grief, you shall tell 
me  then.  Until  that  time, or some  other time beyond the vision  of  the 
Seeing-stones of N®menor, farewell! ' 
     He rose and bowed low to Frodo, and drawing the curtain passed out into 
the cave. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. Journey to the Cross-roads 

 
 
     Frodo and Sam returned  to their  beds and lay there in silence resting 
for a little,  while men bestirred themselves  and  the business of the  day 
began. After a while water was brought to them,  and then they were led to a  
table where food was set for three. Faramir broke his fast with them. He had 
not slept since the battle on the day before, yet he did not look weary. 
     When they had finished they stood up. `May no hunger trouble you on the 
road,'  said  Faramir. `You  have little provision, but some small  store of 
food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed  in your packs. You will 
have  no lack  of  water as you walk in Ithilien,  but  do not  drink of any 
stream that flows from Imlad Morgul, the Valley of Living Death. This also I 
must tell you. My scouts and watchers  have all returned, even some that have 
crept within sight of the Morannon. They all find  a strange thing. The land 
is empty.  Nothing  is  on the  road,  and  no sound  of foot, or  horn,  or  
bowstring is anywhere  to be  heard.  A  waiting  silence broods  above  the 
Nameless Land.  I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly 
to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may! If  you are 
ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.' 
     The hobbits' packs were brought to them (a little heavier than they had 
been), and  also two stout staves of polished wood, shod with iron, and with  
carven heads through which ran plaited leathern thongs.  
     'I  have no fitting  gifts  to  give you at our parting,' said Faramir ; 
`but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or climb in 
the wild.  The  men of  the White Mountains use them; though these have been 
cut  down to your  height and  newly  shod. They  are made of the fair  tree 
lebethron, beloved of   the woodwrights of Gondor, and a  virtue has been set 
upon them of finding  and returning.  May that virtue not wholly  fail under  
the Shadow into which you go!' 
     The hobbits  bowed low. `Most  gracious host,' said Frodo, 'it was said 
to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way, secret 
and unlooked  for. Certainly I looked  for no such  friendship  as you  have 
shown. To have found it turns evil to great good.' 
     Now they made ready to depart. Gollum was brought out of some corner or  
hiding-hole,  and he seemed  better pleased with himself  than he had  been,  

####-though he kept close to Frodo and avoided the glance of Faramir.  
     'Your  guide  must  be  blindfolded,' said Faramir, 'but  you and  your 
servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.' 
     Gollum squealed, and squirmed, and clutched at Frodo, when they came to 
bind his eyes; and Frodo said: 'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes 
first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm  is meant.' This  was done, 
and they were led from the cave of Henneth Annyn. After they  had passed the 
passages  and stairs they felt the cool morning air, fresh and sweet,  about 
them. Still blind they went on for  some  little time,  up  and  then gently 
down. At last the voice of Faramir ordered them to be uncovered. 
     They stood under the boughs  of the woods again. No noise  of the falls 
could be heard,  for  a  long  southward slope lay now  between them and the 
ravine in which the stream flowed. To the west they could  see light through 
the trees, as if the  world came there  to a sudden end, at a  brink looking 
out only on to sky. 
     'Here  is the last parting of our ways,' said Faramir. 'If you take  my 
counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go  straight on, for  thus you will 
have the cover of the woodland for many miles. On your west is an edge where 
the land falls into the great vales, sometimes suddenly and sheer, sometimes 
in  long  hillsides. Keep near to this edge and the skirts of the forest. In 
the beginning of your journey you may walk under daylight, I think. The land 
dreams in  a false peace, and  for a while  all evil is  withdrawn. Fare you  
well, while you may!' 
     He embraced the hobbits then, after the manner of his people, stooping, 
and placing his hands upon their shoulders, and kissing their foreheads. 'Go 
with the good will of all good men!' he said. 
     They bowed to the ground. Then he  turned and without  looking back  he 
left them  and went to his  two guards that stood at a little distance away. 
They marvelled  to  see  with  what speed  these green-clad men  now  moved, 
vanishing almost in the twinkling of an  eye.  The forest  where Faramir had 
stood seemed empty and drear, as if a dream had passed. 
     Frodo sighed and turned back southward. As if to  mark his disregard of 
all such courtesy, Gollum was scrabbling in the mould at the foot of a tree. 
`Hungry again already?' thought Sam. `Well, now for it again!' 
     'Have they  gone at last? ' said Gollum. `Nassty wicked Men!  Smjagol's 
neck still hurts him, yes it does. Let's go! ' 
     `Yes, let  us go,' said Frodo. `But  if you can only speak ill of those 

####-who showed you mercy, keep silent! ' 
     `Nice Master! ' said Gollum. `Smjagol was only joking. Always forgives,  
he  does, yes, yes, even nice Master's little trickses. Oh yes, nice Master, 
nice Smjagol! ' 
     Frodo and Sam did not  answer.  Hoisting their packs and  taking  their 
staves in hand, they passed on into the woods of Ithilien. 
     Twice that day they  rested  and took a little of the food provided  by 
Faramir:  dried fruits and  salted  meat, enough for  many  days;  and bread 
enough to last while it was still fresh. Gollum ate nothing. 
     The sun rose and  passed  overhead unseen, and began to sink,  and  the 
light through  the trees to the west grew golden; and always they  walked in 
cool green  shadow, and all about  them was silence. The birds seemed all to 
have flown away or to have fallen dumb. 
     Darkness came early  to the silent  woods, and before the fall of night 
they halted, weary, for they had walked  seven leagues or more  from Henneth 
Annyn. Frodo lay and  slept  away  the  night  on the  deep mould beneath an 
ancient tree. Sam beside  him was more uneasy: he woke many times, but there 
was never a sign of Gollum, who had slipped off as  soon as  the others  had 
settled to rest. Whether he had slept by himself in some hole nearby, or had 
wandered  restlessly prowling through  the  night, he did  not say;  but  he 
returned with the first glimmer of light, and roused his companions.  
     `Must get up, yes  they must!'  he  said. 'Long ways to go still, south 
and east. Hobbits must make haste!' 
     That day passed  much  as the  day  before had  gone,  except that  the 
silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavy, and it began to be stifling under  
the trees. It felt as if thunder was  brewing. Gollum often paused, sniffing 
the air, and then he would mutter to himself and urge them to greater speed.  
     As the third stage of  their day's  march drew on  and afternoon wa ned, 
the forest opened out, and the trees became larger and more scattered. Great 
ilexes of  huge girth stood  dark  and solemn in  wide glades with  here and 
there among  them  hoary ash-trees. and  giant oaks  just putting  out their 
brown-green  buds.  About them  lay long launds of green  grass dappled with 
celandine and anemones, white and blue, now folded for sleep; and there were 
acres  populous with  the leaves of  woodland hyacinths: already their sleek  
bell-stems were  thrusting through the  mould . No  living creature, beast or  
bird, was to be seen, but in these open places Gollum grew afraid, and  they  
walked now with caution, flitting from one long shadow to another. 

####-     Light  was fading fast when they came to the forest -end. There they sat 
under  an old gnarled oak that  sent its roots twisting like snakes  down  a  
steep crumbling bank. A deep dim valley lay before them. On its further side 
the  woods gathered  again,  blue  and grey under  the  sullen  evening, and 
marched on southwards. To the  right the Mountains of Gondor  glowed, 
remote 
in  the  West,  under  a fire-flecked  sky. To  the left  lay darkness:  the 
towering walls of Mordor;  and  out of  that darkness the long valley  came, 
falling steeply in an ever -widening trough towards the Anduin. At its bottom 
ran a hurrying stream:  Frodo could  hear its stony voice coming  up through 
the silence; and beside  it on the hither side a road went winding down like 
a pale ribbon, down into chill grey mists that  no  gleam of sunset touched. 
There it seemed to  Frodo that he descried far off, floating as it were on a  
shadowy sea, the high  dim  tops and broken pinnacles of old  towers forlorn 
and dark. 
     He turned to Gollum. `Do you know where we are? ' he said. 
     'Yes,  Master. Dangerous places. This is the road from the Tower of the 
Moon, Master, down to the ruined city by the shores of the River. The ruined 
city, yes, very nasty place, full of  enemies. We shouldn't have taken Men's 
advice. Hobbits have come a long way out of the path. Must go east now, away 
up there.' He waved his skinny arm  towards  the darkling mountains. `And we 
can't  use  this  road. Oh  no!  Cruel peoples come this way, down  from the 
Tower.' 
     Frodo looked down on to the road. At any rate nothing was moving  on it  
now. It appeared lonely  and forsaken, running  down to empty  ruins  in the 
mist. But there was an evil feeling in the air, as if things might indeed be 
passing up and down that  eyes could  not see. Frodo shuddered  as he looked 
again  at the distant pinnacles now dwindling into  night, and the  sound of 
the water  seemed  cold  and cruel: the voice  of Morgulduin,  the  polluted 
stream that flowed from the Valley of the Wraiths.  
     'What shall we do?  ' he said.  'We have walked long  and far. Shall we 
look for some place in the woods behind where we can lie hidden? ' 
     'No good  hiding in the  dark,' said Gollum. 'It's in day that  hobbits 
must hide now, yes in day.' 
     `Oh come! ' said Sam.  'We must rest for a bit, even if we get up again 
in the middle of the night. There'll still be hours of dark then time enough 
for you to take us a long march, if you know the way.' 

####-     Gollum  reluctantly agreed  to  this, and  he  turned  back towards the 
trees, working eastward for a  while along the straggling edges of the wood.  
He would not rest on the ground so near the evil road, and after some debate 
they  all climbed  up into  the  crotch of  a  large  holm-oak, whose  thick  
branches springing together from  the trunk made a good  hiding-place and  a 
fairly comfortable refuge.  Night fell and it grew altogether dark under the 
canopy of the  tree.  Frodo and Sam drank a  little water and ate some bread 
and dried fruit, but Gollum at once curled up and went to sleep. The hobbits 
did not shut their eyes. 
     It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up: suddenly 
they were aware of his pale eyes unlidded gleaming at them. He  listened and 
sniffed,  which seemed,  as  they had noticed before,  his  usual method  of 
discovering the time of night. 
     'Are we rested? Have we had beautiful sleep?' he said. 'Let's go!' 
     'We aren't, and we haven't,' growled Sam. 'But we'll go if we must.' 
     Gollum dropped at once  from  the branches of the tree on to all fours,  
and the hobbits followed more slowly. 
     As  soon  as they  were down they  went  on again  with Gollum leading,  
eastwards, up the  dark sloping  land. They could see little,  for the night 
was  now so deep that  they were  hardly aware of the  stems of trees before 
they stumbled  against them. The ground  became more broken  and walking 
was 
more  difficult, but Gollum seemed in no  way troubled. He  led them through 
thickets and wastes of brambles; sometimes round  the lip of a deep cleft or  
dark pit, sometimes down into black bush-shrouded hollows and out again; but 
if ever they went a little downward, always the further slope was longer and 
steeper. They were climbing steadily. At their first  halt they looked back, 
and they could  dimly perceive the roofs of the forest they   had left behind 
lying like  a  vast  dense shadow, a darker night under the  dark blank sky. 
There seemed to be a great  blackness looming slowly out of the East, eating  
up the faint blurred stars. Later the sinking moon escaped from the pursuing 
cloud, but it was ringed all about with a sickly yellow glare. 
     At last  Gollum  turned  to the hobbits. 'Day soon,' he  said. 'Hobbits 
must hurry. Not safe to stay in the open in these places. Make haste! ' 
     He quickened his pace, and they  followed him wearily.  Soon they began 
to climb up on to a great hog-back of land. For the most part it was covered 
with a thick growth of gorse and whortleberry, and  low tough thorns, though 

####-here and there clearings opened, the scars of recent fires. The gorse-bushes 
became  more frequent  as they  got nearer the  top; very old and  tall they 
were, gaunt and leggy below but thick above, and already  putting out yellow 
flowers  that  glimmered in the gloom and gave a faint  sweet scent. So tall 
were the spiny  thickets that the  hobbits could  walk upright  under  them, 
passing through long dry aisles carpeted with a deep prickly mould. 
     On the further edge of this broad hill-back they stayed their march and  
crawled for hiding  underneath a  tangled  knot  of  thorns.  Their  twisted 
boughs, stooping to the ground, were overridden  by a clambering maze of old 
briars. Deep inside there  was  a hollow hall, raftered with dead branch and 
bramble, and roofed with the first leaves and  shoots  of spring. There they 
lay for a  while, too tired yet to eat; and peering out through the holes in 
the covert they watched for the slow growth of day. 
     But no  day  came, only a dead brown twilight. In the East  there was a  
dull red glare under the lowering cloud: it  was not the red of dawn. Across 
the tumbled lands between, the mountains of the Ephel D®ath frowned at 
them, 
black and shapeless below where night lay thick and did not pass away, above 
with  jagged  tops  and edges outlined  hard and  menacing against the fiery 
glow. Away to their right a great shoulder of the mountains  stood out, dark 
and black amid the shadows, thrusting westward. 
     `Which way do we go from here?' asked Frodo. `Is that the opening of-of 
the Morgul Valley, away over there beyond that black mass? ' 
     `Need we think about it yet?' said Sam, `Surely we're not going to move 
any more today, if day it is?' 
     `Perhaps not, perhaps not,' said Gollum.  `But we must go soon, to  the 
Cross-roads.  Yes,  to  the  Cross-roads. That's the  way  over  ther e  yes, 
Master.' 
     The red glare over Mordor  died  away. The twilight deepened  as  great 
vapours rose in the East and crawled above them. Frodo and Sam took a little 
food and then  lay down,  but Gollum was restless.  He would  not eat any of 
their food, but  he  drank  a little water and  then crawled about under the 
bushes, sniffing and muttering. Then. suddenly he disappeared. 
     `Off hunting, I suppose,' said Sam and yawned. It was his turn to sleep 
first, and  he  was soon deep in a dream. He thought he was back in the  Bag 
End garden looking for something; but he had a heavy pack on his back, which 
made him stoop.  It  all seemed very weedy and rank  somehow, and thorns and 

####-bracken were invading the beds down near the bottom hedge. 
     `A job of work for me, I can see; but I'm so tired,' he kept on saying. 
Presently  he remembered what he was looking  for. `My  pipe!'  he said, and 
with that he woke up. 
     `Silly!' he said  to himself, as he opened his eyes and wondered why he 
was lying  down under the hedge. `It's in  your pack all the time!'  Then he 
realized, first that the pipe might  be in his pack but he had  no leaf, and 
next that he was hundreds of miles from  Bag End. He sat up. It seemed to be 
almost dark. Why had his master let him sleep  on out of turn, right on till 
evening?  
     `Haven't you had no sleep, Mr. Frodo?' he said. 'What's the time? Seems 
to be getting late!' 
     'No it isn't,' said Frodo.  `But  the day is getting darker instead  of 
lighter: darker and  darker. As far as I  can tell, it isn't midday yet, and 
you've only slept for about three hours.' 
     'I wonder what's up,' said  Sam. 'Is there  a storm coming? If  so it's 
going  to  be the  worst there ever was. We shall  wish  we were down a deep 
hole, not just stuck  under a hedge.' He listened. `What's that? Thunder, or  
drums, or what is it? ' 
     'I don't know,' said  Frodo. `It's been going on for a good while  now.  
Sometimes the ground seems  to  tremble, sometimes it seems to be  the heavy 
air throbbing in your ears.' 
     Sam looked  round.  `Where's Gollum?  ' he said. 'Hasn't he  come  back  
yet?' 
     `No,' said Frodo. `There's not been a sign or sound of him.' 
     `Well,  I  can't abide  him,'  said  Sam.  `In fact,  I've  never taken 
anything on a journey that I'd have been less sorry to lose  on the way. But 
it  would be just like him, after coming all these miles, to go and get lost  
now, just when we shall need him most  --  that is, if he's ever going  to be 
any use, which I doubt.' 
     `You forget the Marshes,' said Frodo.  `I hope nothing has happened  to 
him.' 
     `And I hope he's  up to  no  tricks. And anyway I  hope he doesn't fall 
into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we  shall soon be in 
for trouble.' 
     At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again, louder now 
and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their feet. 'I think we are in 

####-for trouble anyhow,' said Frodo. `I'm  afraid our journey  is  drawing to an 
end.' 
     'Maybe,' said Sam;  `but  where there's life there's hope, as my Gaffer  
used to say;  and need of vittles, as he  mostways used to  add. You  have a  
bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.' 
     The  afternoon, as Sam supposed it must be called, wore on. Looking out 
from the  covert he  could see only a dun, shadowless  world,  fading slowly 
into a featureless,  colourless gloom.  It felt stifling but not warm. Frodo 
slept  unquietly,  turning and  tossing,  and sometimes murmuring. Twice Sam 
thought  he heard him speaking  Gandalf's  name.  The  time  seemed  to drag 
interminably. Suddenly Sam heard a hiss behind him, and  there was Gollum 
on 
all fours, peering at them with gleaming eyes.  
     `Wake up, wake up! Wake up, sleepies!' he whispered. `Wake up!  No time 
to lose. We must go, yes, we must go at once. No time to lose!' 
     Sam stared  at him suspiciously: he  seemed frightened or excited.  `Go 
now? What's your little game?  It isn't time yet. It can't be tea -time even, 
leastways not in decent places where there is tea -time.' 
     `Silly!  ' hissed Gollum. `We're not in  decent places.  Time's running 
short, yes, running fast. No time to lose. We must go. Wake up. Master, wake 
u He clawed at Frodo; and  Frodo, startled out of sleep, sat up suddenly and 
seized him by the arm. Gollum tore h imself loose and backed away. 
     'They mustn't  be silly,' he hissed. `We must go. No time to lose!' And 
nothing more could  they  get  out of him. Where he  had been, and  what  he 
thought was brewing to make  him in  such a hurry, he would not say. Sam was 
filled with deep suspicion,  and showed it; but  Frodo gave no sign  of what 
was passing in his mind. He sighed, hoisted his pack, and prepared to go out 
into the ever -gathering darkness.  
     Very stealthily  Gollum led them down the hillside, keeping under cover  
wherever it was possible, and running, almost bent to the ground, across any 
open space; but the light was now so dim that even  a keen-eyed beast of the 
wild could scarcely have seen the hobbits, hooded, in their grey cloaks, nor  
heard them,  walking as warily as the little people can. Without the crack of 
a twig or the rustle of a leaf they passed and vanished. 
     For about an hour they went on, silently, in  single file, oppressed by 
the gloom and by the  absolute stillness  of the land,  broken only now  and 
again  by the  faint rumbling as  of thunder far away or  drum-beats in some  

####-hollow  of  the hills.  Down  from their hiding-place  they  went,  and then 
turning  south they steered as straight a course as Gollum could find across 
a long broken slope that leaned up towards the mountains. Presently, not far  
ahead, looming up  like a black wall, they saw a belt of trees. As they drew 
nearer they  became aware  that  these were of vast  size,  very  ancient it 
seemed, and still towering high, though their tops were gaunt and broken, as 
if tempest and lightning-blast had swept across them, but had failed to kill 
them or to shake their fathomless roots.  
     'The Cross-roads, yes,' whispered Gollum, the first words that had been 
spoken  since they left  their hiding-place. 'We must go  that way.' Turning 
eastward  now, he led them up  the slope;  and  then suddenly  there  it was 
before them: the Southward Road, winding its way about the outer feet of the 
mountains, until presently it plunged  into the great ring of trees.  
     'This is the only way,' whispered Gollum. 'No paths beyond the road. No 
paths. We must go to the Cross-roads. But make haste! Be silent! ' 
     As furtively as scouts within the campment of their enemies, they crept 
down on to the road, and stole along its westward edge under the stony bank, 
grey as the stones themselves,  and soft -footed  as hunting cats.  At length 
they reached the trees, and found that they stood in a great  roofless ring, 
open in  the middle to the sombre sky; and the spaces between  their immense 
boles  were  like the great  dark arches of  some  ruined  hall. In the very 
centre four ways met. Behind them lay the road to the  Morannon; before them 
it ran out again upon its  long journey south; to their right the road  from 
old  Osgiliath  came  climbing up,  and crossing,  passed out eastward  into 
darkness: the fourth way, the road they were to take. 
     Standing there for a moment filled with dread Frodo became aware that a  
light was shining;  he  saw it  glowing  on  Sam's face beside  him. Turning 
towards it, he saw, beyond an arch of boughs, the road to  Osgiliath running  
almost as straight  as  a stretched ribbon down, down, into the West. There, 
far away, beyond sad Gondor now overwhelmed in shade,  the  Sun was 
sinking, 
finding at last the hem of the great slow-rolling pall of cloud, and falling 
in an ominous fire towards the yet unsullied Sea. The brief glow fell upon a  
huge sitting  figure, still and solemn as the great stone kings of Argonath. 
The years had gnawed it, and violent hands had maimed it. Its head was gone, 
and in its place was set in mockery a round rough-hewn stone, rudely painted 
by savage hands in the likeness of a grinning face with one large red eye in 

####-the midst  of  its forehead. Upon its knees and mighty chair,  and all about 
the pedestal,  were idle  scrawls  mixed  with  the foul  symbols  that  the 
maggot-folk of Mordor used. 
     Suddenly, caught by the level beams,  Frodo saw the old king's head: it 
was lying rolled away by the  roadside. `Look, Sam!' he cried, startled into 
speech. `Look! The king has got a crown again!' 
     The eyes  were hollow and the  carven  beard was  broken, but about the 
high stern forehead there was a coronal of silver and gold. A trailing plant 
with flowers like small white stars had bound  itself across the brows as if 
in reverence for the fallen king,  and in the crevices  of  his  stony  hair 
yellow stonecrop gleamed. 
     'They cannot conquer for ever!' said Frodo. And then suddenly the brief 
glimpse was gone. The Sun dipped and vanished, and  as if at the  shuttering 
of a lamp, black night fell. 
 

####- 

Chapter 8. The Stairs of Cirith Ungol 

 
 
     Gollum  was  tugging  at  Frodo's  cloak  and  hissing  with  fear  and 
impatience. `We must go,' he said. `We mustn't stand here. Make haste!' 
     Reluctantly Frodo turned his back on the West and followed as his guide 
led  him, out into the darkness of the East. They left the ring of trees and 
crept along the road towards the mountains. This road, too, ran straight for  
a while,  but  soon it began to  bend  away southwards,  until it came right 
under the great shoulder of rock that they had seen from the distance. Black  
and  forbidding  it  loomed  above them, darker  than the  dark  sky behind. 
Crawl ing  under  its shadow the road  went on,  and rounding it sprang  east  
again and began to climb steeply. 
     Frodo and Sam were  plodding along with heavy hearts, no longer able to  
care greatly  about  their  peril. Frodo's head  was  bowed; his burden  was 
dragging him down again. As soon as the great  Cross-roads  had been passed, 
the weight of it, almost forgotten in Ithilien, had begun to grow once more. 
Now, feeling the way become steep before his feet, he looked wearily up; and 
then he  saw  it, even  as Gollum  had said  that he would: the city of  the 
Ringwraiths. He cowered against the stony bank. 
     A long-tilted  valley, a  deep gulf of shadow,  ran back far  into  the 
mountains. Upon the further side, some way  within the valley's arms high on 
a  rocky seat upon the black knees  of  the Ephel D®ath, stood the walls and  
tower of Minas Morgul. All was dark about it, earth and sky, but it  was lit 
with light. Not the imprisoned moonlight welling through the marble walls of 
Minas  Ithil long ago, Tower of the  Moon, fair and radiant in the hollow of 
the hills. Paler  indeed than  the moon ailing in some  slow eclipse was the 
light of it now, wavering and blowing like a  noisome exhalation of decay, a  
corpse-light, a light that  illuminated  nothing.  In  the  walls  and tower  
windows showed, like countless black holes  looking inward  into  emptiness;  
but  the topmost course of the tower revolved slowly, first one way and then 
another, a huge ghostly head  leering into the night. For a moment the three 
companions  stood there, shrinking,  staring  up with unwilling eyes. Gollum 
was the first to recover. Again he pulled  at their cloaks urgently,  but he 
spoke no word. Almost he dragged them forward. Every step was reluctant, and 
time seemed to slow its pace. so that between the raising of a foot  and the 

####-setting of it down minutes of loathing passed. 
     So they came  slowly  to the  white  bridge.  Here  the  road, gleaming 
faintly,  passed over the  stream  in the midst of the valley, and went  on, 
winding  deviously up towards the city's gate: a black  mouth opening in the 
outer circle of the  northward walls. Wide flats lay on either bank, shadowy 
meads filled with pale white flowers. Luminous these were too, beautiful and 
yet horrible of shape, like the demented  forms in an uneasy dream; and they  
gave forth a  faint sickening charnel-smell; an  odour  of rottenness filled 
the  air. From  mead to mead  the  bridge sprang. Figures stood there at its 
head, carven  with cunning  in forms human  and bestial, but all corrupt and  
loathsome.  The water flowing  beneath was  silent, and  it steamed, but the 
vapour that  rose from it, curling and twisting about the bridge, was deadly 
cold. Frodo felt his senses  reeling and his mind darkening. Then  suddenly, 
as if some force were  at work other than his own will, he began  to  hurry, 
tottering forward, his groping hands held out, his head lolling from side to 
side. Both Sam and Gollum ran after him. Sam caught his  master in his arms,  
as he stumbled and almost fell, right on the threshold of the bridge. 
     `Not  that way! No, not that  way! '  whispered  Gollum, but the breath 
between  his teeth seemed to tear the heavy stillness like a whistle, and he 
cowered to the ground in terror. 
     `Hold  up,  Mr. Frodo! ' muttered Sam  in  Frodo's ear. 'Come back! Not 
that way. Gollum says not, and for once I agree with him.' 
     Frodo passed his hand over his brow and wrenched his eyes away from the 
city  on the  hill.  The luminous  tower fascinated him,  and he fought  the 
desire that was on him to run up the gleaming road towards its gate. At last  
with an effort he turned back, and as  he did so, he felt the Ring resisting 
him, dragging  at the chain about his  neck; and his  eyes too, as he looked 
away, seemed for the moment to  have  been blinded.  The darkness before him 
was impenetrable. 
     Gollum, crawling on  the ground like  a frightened animal, was  already 
vanishing into the gloom. Sam, supporting and guiding his  stumbling master, 
followed after him as quickly as he could. Not far from the near bank of the  
stream there was a gap in the stone-wall beside the road. Through this  they 
passed, and Sam saw that they were on a narrow  path that gleamed faintly at 
first, as  the main road  did,  until  climb ing  above  the meads of  deadly 
flowers it faded and went dark, winding its crooked way up into the northern 
sides of the valley. 

####-     Along this path the hobbits trudged, side by side, unable to see Gollum 
in front of  them, except when  he turned back to  beckon them  on. Then his 
eyes  shone  with  a green-white light, reflecting  the noisome Morgul-sheen 
perhaps, or kindled by some answering mood within. Of that deadly gleam  and 
of  the dark eyeholes Frodo  and Sam  were  always conscious,  ever glancing 
fearfully over their shoulders,  and  ever dragging their eyes  back to find 
the darkening path. Slowly  they laboured on. As they rose  above the stench  
and vapours of  the poisonous stream their  breath  became easier and  their 
heads clearer; but now their limbs were deadly tired, as  if they had walked 
all night under a burden, or had been swimming long against a heavy  tide of 
water. At last they could go no further without a halt. 
     Frodo stopped and  sat down on a stone. They had now climbed up  to the 
top  of  a  great  hump of bare rock.  Ahead of them  there was a bay in the 
valley-side, and  round the  head of this  the path  went on, no more than a  
wide ledge with a chasm on the right; across the sheer southward face of the 
mountain it crawled upwards, until it disappeared into the blackness above. 
     `I  must rest a  while, Sam,' whispered Frodo. `It's heavy  on me,  Sam 
lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry  it? Anyway I must rest before 
we venture on to that.' He pointed to the narrow way ahead. 
     `Sssh! ssh! ' hissed Gollum hurrying back to them. `Sssh! ' His fingers 
were on his lips and he shook his head urgently. Tugging  at Frodo's sleeve,  
he pointed towards the path; but Frodo would not move. 
     `Not  yet,' he  said,  'not  yet.' Weariness and  more  than  weariness 
oppressed him; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on his mind  and body. 
`I must rest,' he muttered. 
     At  this  Gollum's fear  and  agitation became so  great that he  spoke 
again,  hissing  behind  his hand, as  if to  keep  the  sound  from  unseen 
listeners  in the air. `Not here, no. Not rest here. Fools! Eyes can see us. 
When they come  to the  bridge they will see  us. Come away!  Climb,  climb!  
Come!  ' 
     `Come, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. `He's right, again. We can't stay here.' 
     'All  right,'  said Frodo  in a  remote voice, as of one  speaking half 
asleep. `I will try.' Wearily he got to his feet. 
     But  it  was too  late.  At that moment the rock quivered  and trembled 
beneath them. The  great rumbling noise, louder than ever before, rolled  in 
the ground and echoed in the mountains.  Then  with searing suddenness there 
came a great red flash. Far beyond the eastern  mountains it leapt into  the 

####-sky and splashed the lowering clouds with cr imson.  In that valley of shadow 
and  cold deathly light it  seemed  unbearably violent  and fierce. Peaks of 
stone and ridges like notched knives sprang out in staring black against the 
uprushing flame in Gorgoroth. Then came a great crack of thunder. 
     And Minas Morgul answered. There was a flare of livid lightnings: forks 
of blue flame springing up from the tower and from the encircling hills into 
the sullen clouds. The earth groaned; and out of the city there came  a cry. 
Mingled  with harsh high voices as of birds of prey, and the shrill neighing 
of horses wild with rage  and fear, there came a rending screech, shivering, 
rising swiftly to a piercing pitch beyond the range of hearing.  The hobbits 
wheeled round towards it, and cast themselves down, holding their hands upon 
their ears. 
     As the terrible cry ended, falling back  through a long sickening  wail 
to  silence, Frodo slowly  raised his head.  Across the  narrow  valley, now 
almost on  a level with his eyes, the walls of the evil city stood ,  and its 
cavernous  gate, shaped like an open mouth with gleaming  teeth,  was gaping 
wide. And out of the gate an army came. 
     All that  host  was clad in  sable, dark  as the night. Against the wan 
walls and  the luminous pavement  of  the  road Frodo could  see them, small 
black figures in rank upon rank,  marching  swiftly  and  silently,  passing 
outwards in  an endless stream. Before them went a great cavalry of horsemen 
moving like  ordered shadows, and at their head was one greater than all the 
rest: a Rider, all black, save that on his  hooded head he had a helm like a  
crown that  flickered with  a  perilous  light.  Now he was drawing near the 
bridge below,  and Frodo's staring eyes followed him,  unable to  wink or to 
withdraw. Surely there was the Lord of the  Nine Riders returned to earth to 
lead his ghastly  host to battle? Here, yes here indeed was the haggard king 
whose cold  hand had smitten down the Ring-bearer with his deadly knife. The 
old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards Frodo's heart. 
     Even  as these thoughts  pierced him with dread  and held him  bound as 
with a  spell, the Rider halted suddenly, right  before the  entrance of the 
bridge, and behind him all the host stood still. There was  a pause, a  dead 
silence. Maybe it was  the Ring that called  to the  Wraith-lord, and for  a  
moment he was troubled, sensing some other power within his valley. This way 
and that turned the dark head helmed  and  crowned  with  fear, sweeping the 
shadows with its unseen eyes. Frodo waited, like a bird at the approach of a  
snake,  unable to move.  And  as  he  waited, he felt, more urgent than ever  

####-before,  the command  that  he  should  put on  the Ring.  But great as  the 
pressure was, he felt no  inclination now to yield to it. He  knew that  the 
Ring would only betray him, and that he had not, even if  he  put it on, the 
power  to face the  Morgul-king-not yet. There was no  longer any  answer to 
that command in his own will,  dismayed by terror though it was, and he  felt 
only the  beating upon him of a  great power from outside. It took his hand, 
and as Frodo watched with his mind, not willing it but in suspense (as if he 
looked on some  old story far  away), it moved the hand inch by inch towards 
the chain upon his neck. Then his  own will stirred;  slowly  it forced  the 
hand  back. and  set it to find another thing, a thing lying hidden near his 
breast. Cold and  hard it  seemed as  his  grip closed on it:  the  phial of 
Galadriel, so long  treasured, and  almost forgotten till  that hour.  As he 
touched it, for a while all thought of the Ring was banished from his  mind. 
He sighed and bent his head. 
     At  that moment the Wraith-king  turned and spurred  his horse and rode 
across the bridge, and all his dark host followed him. Maybe the elven-hoods 
defied his unseen eyes, and the mind of his small enemy; being strengthened, 
had turned  aside his thought.  But  he  was  in haste. Already the hour had 
struck,  and at his great Master's  bidding he must march with  war into the 
West. 
     Soon he had passed, like a shadow  into shadow, down  the winding road, 
and  behind  him still the black ranks crossed the bridge. So great an  army 
had never issued from that vale since the  days of  Isildur's might; no host  
so fell and strong in arms had yet assailed the fords of Anduin; and yet  it 
was but one and not the greatest of the hosts that Mordor now sent forth. 
     Frodo  stirred. And suddenly  his heart went out to Faramir. 'The storm 
has burst at last,' he thought. `This great  array of spears  and  swords is 
going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He  guessed it, but did 
he know the hour? And  who can now hold  the fords when the King of the 
Nine 
Riders comes? And  other armies will  come.  I  am too late. All is lost.  I 
tarried on the way. All is lost. Even if my errand is performed, no one will 
ever know. There will be  no one  I can  tell. It will be in vain.' Overcome 
with weakness he wept. And still the host of Morgul crossed the bridge. 
     Then at a  great distance, as if it  came out of memories of  the Shire, 
some sunlit early morning,  when  the  day called and doors were opening, he 
heard  Sam's voice  speaking. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  Wake up! ' Had the voice 

####-added:  `Your breakfast is  ready,' he  would hardly  have  been  surprised. 
Certainly Sam was urgent. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They're gone,' he said. 
     There was  a dull clang. The gates of Minas Morgul had closed. The last 
rank of spears had  vanished down  the road. The tower still grinned  across 
the valley, but the light was fading  in it. The whole city was falling back  
into  a  dark brooding  shade,  and  silence.  Yet still it was filled  with 
watchfulness.  
     'Wake  up,  Mr. Frodo!  They're gone, and  we'd better  go too. There's 
something still alive in that place, something with eyes,  or a seeing mind, 
if you take  me; and the  longer we stay in one spot, the sooner it will get 
on to us. Come on, Mr. Frodo! ' 
     Frodo raised his head, and then stood up. Despair had not left him, but 
the weakness had  passed. He even smiled grimly, feeling now as clearly as a 
moment before he had  felt the opposite,  that  what he had to do, he had to 
do, if he could, and that whether  Faramir or Aragorn or Elrond or Galadriel  
or Gandalf or anyone e lse ever knew about it was beside the purpose. He took 
his staff in one hand and the phial in his other. When he saw that the clear 
light was already welling through his fingers, he  thrust it into his  bosom 
and held it against his heart. Then turning from the city of Morgul,  now no 
more  than a grey glimmer across a dark gulf, he prepared to take the upward 
road. 
     Gollum, it  seemed,  had  crawled off along the ledge into the darkness 
beyond, when the  gates  of Minas  Morgul  opened, leaving the hobbits where 
they  lay. He now came creeping back, his  teeth chattering and his  fingers 
snapping. `Foolish!  Silly!  '  he hissed. `Make haste!  They  mustn't think  
danger has passed. It hasn't. Make haste!  ' 
     They did not answer, but they followed him on to the climbing ledge. It 
was little to the liking of either of  them, not even  after facing so  many 
other perils; but it did not  last  long.  Soon the  path reached a  rounded 
angle  where  the  mountain-side  swelled out  again, and  there it suddenly 
entered a narrow  opening in the rock. They had come to the first stair that 
Gollum had spoken of. The  darkness  was almost complete, and they could see 
nothing  much  beyond their hands' stretch; but  Gollum's  eyes shone  pale, 
several feet above, as he turned back towards them. 
     `Careful! ' he whispered. `Steps. Lots of steps. Must be careful! ' 
     Care was certainly needed. Frodo and  Sam at  first felt easier, having 
now a wall on either side, but the stairway was almost as steep as a ladder , 

####-and as they climbed up and  up, they became more  and more aware of the long 
black fall  behind them.  And the steps  were narrow,  spaced unevenly,  and 
often treacherous: they  were worn and  smooth at  the  edges, and some were 
broken, and  some cracked  as foot was set  upon them. The hobbits struggled 
on,  until at last they  were  clinging with  desperate fingers to the steps 
ahead, and forcing their  aching knees  to bend and  straighten; and ever as 
the stair cut its way deeper  into the  sheer mountain the rocky walls  rose 
higher and higher above their heads.  
     At  length, just as they felt that they could endure no more, they  saw 
Gollum's  eyes peering  down at them again. `We're up,' he whispered. 'First  
stair's past. Clever hobbits to  climb so high, very  clever hobbits. Just a  
few more little steps and that's all, yes.' 
     Dizzy and very  tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up the last  
step, and sat down rubbing their legs  and knees. They were in  a  deep dark 
passage that seemed still to go  up before  them,  though at a gentler slope 
and without steps. Gollum did not let them rest long. 
     'There's another stair still,' he said. `Much  longer stair. Rest  when 
we get to the top of next stair. Not yet.' 
     Sam groaned. 'Longer, did you say? ' he asked. 
     'Yes, yess, longer,' said Gollum. `But not  so  difficult. Hobbits have 
climbed the Straight Stair. Next comes the Winding Stair.' 
     'And what after that? ' said Sam. 
     `We shall see,' said Gollum softly. `O yes, we shall see!  ' 
     'I thought you said there  was  a  tunnel,' said  Sam.  `Isn't  there a  
tunnel or something to go through? ' 
     'O yes,  there's a tunnel,' said Gollum. `But hobbits  can rest  before 
they try that. If they get through that,  they'll be nearly at the top. Very 
nearly, if they get through. O yes! ' 
     Frodo shivered. The climb had made him sweat, but now  he felt cold and 
clammy, and there was a chill draught in the dark passage, blowing down from 
the invisible  heights above. He got up and shook himself.  `Well, let's  go 
on! ' he said. `This is no place to sit in.' 
     The passage seemed to go on  for miles, and always the chill air flowed 
over them, rising as they went on to  a bitter wind. The mountains seemed to 
be trying with their deadly breath to daunt them, to turn them back from the  
secrets of the high places,  or to blow them away  into the darkness behind. 
They only knew  that  they had come  to the end, when suddenly  they felt no 

####-wall at their right hand. They  could see very little. Great black shapeless 
masses and deep  grey shadows loomed above  them and about them, but now 
and 
again a dull  red light flickered up under  the lowering  clouds, and for  a  
moment  they were aware of  tall peaks, in  front  and on  either side, like 
pillars holding up a vast sagging roof. They  seemed to have climbed up many 
hundreds of feet, on to a wide shelf. A cliff was on their  left and a chasm 
on their right. 
     Gollum led the way close under the cliff.  For the present they were no 
longer climbing, but the  ground  was now more broken  and  dangerous in the 
dark, and there  were blocks and  lumps of fallen stone  in the  way.  Their 
going  was slow and  cautious.  How  many hours  had  passed  since they had 
entered the  Morgul Vale  neither Sam nor Frodo could  any longer guess. The 
night seemed endless. 
     At length they were once more aware of a wall looming up, and once more 
a stairway opened before them. Again  they halted, and  again they  began to  
climb. It was a long and weary ascent; but this  stairway did not delve into 
the  mountain-side. Here  the huge cliff face sloped backwards, and the path 
like  a  snake wound  to and fro across it. At one point it crawled sideways 
right to the  edge of the dark chasm, and Frodo  glancing down saw below him 
as  a vast deep pit the great ravine at the head of the Morgul Valley.  Down 
in  its depths glimmered like  a glow-worm thread the  wraith-road from  the 
dead city to the Nameless Pass. He turned hastily away. 
     Still  on and up the  stairway bent and  crawled, until  at last with a  
final flight, short  and straight, it climbed out again on to another level. 
The  path had veered away from the main pass in the great ravine, and it now 
followed  its own  perilous course at the bottom of a lesser cleft among the 
higher  regions  of  the Ephel D®ath. Dimly  the hobbits could  discern tall 
piers and jagged pinnacles of stone on either side, between which were great 
crevices  and fissures blacker than  the night, where  forgotten winter s had 
gnawed and carved the sunless stone. And now the red light in the sky seemed 
stronger; though they could not tell whether a  dreadful morning were indeed 
coming to this place of shadow, or whether  they saw only the flame of  some 
great violence  of  Sauron in  the torment  of Gorgoroth  beyond.  Still far 
ahead, and still high above, Frodo, looking up, saw, as he guessed, the very 
crown of  this  bitter road. Against the sullen redness of the eastern sky a  
cleft was outlined  in  the topmost ridge,  narrow, deep-cloven between  two 

####-black shoulders; and on either shoulder was a horn of stone. 
     He paused  and looked more attentively. The horn upon the left was tall 
and slender; and in it burned a red light, or else the red light in the land 
beyond was shining through a hole. He saw now: it  was a black  tower poised 
above the outer pass. He touched Sam's arm and pointed. 
     'I  don't like the look of that! ' said Sam.  `So  this secret  way  of 
yours is guarded after all,' he growled, turning to Gollum. 'As you knew all 
along, I suppose? ' 
     'All ways  are watched, yes,' said Gollum.  `Of  course they  are.  But 
hobbits must  try  some way. This may  be least watched. Perhaps they've all  
gone away to big battle, perhaps! ' 
     'Perhaps,' grunted Sam.  'Well, it  still  seems a long  way off, and a  
long way  up before we get there. And there's still the tunnel. I think  you  
ought to rest now,  Mr. Frodo. I don't know what time of day or night it is, 
but we've kept going for hours and hours.' 
     `Yes, we must  rest,' said Frodo. 'Let us find some corner out  of  the 
wind, and gather our  strength-for  the last lap.' For so  he felt it to be. 
The  terrors of  the land  beyond, and  the deed to  be  done there,  seemed 
remote, too  far off yet to  trouble  him. All his mind  was bent on getting 
through or over this impenetrable wall and guard.  If once he could do  that 
impossible thing, then  somehow the errand would be  accomplished, or so  it 
seemed to him in that  dark hour of weariness, still  labouring in the stony 
shadows under Cirith Ungol. 
     In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock they sat down:  Frodo 
and  Sam a  little  way within. and Gollum crouched upon the ground near the 
opening. There the hobbits took what  they expected would be their last meal 
before they went down into the Nameless Land, maybe the last meal they 
would 
ever  eat together. Some of the food  of Gondor they ate, and  wafers of the 
waybread of the Elves. and they drank a little. But of their water they were 
sparing and took only enough to moisten their dry mouths. 
     `I wonder when we'll find water again? ' said Sam. 'But I suppose  even 
over there they drink? Orcs drink, don't they? ' 
     'Yes,  they drink,' said Frodo. 'But do not let  us speak of that. Such 
drink is not for us.' 
     `Then  all  the  more need  to fill our bottles,' said  Sam. `But there 
isn't any water up here: not  a sound or a trickle  have I heard. And anyway 

####-Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul.' 
     'No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words,' said Frodo. `We 
are not in that valley now, and if we came  on a spring  it would be flowing 
into it and not out of it.' 
     'I  wouldn't  trust  it,' said Sam, 'not  till  I was dying  of thirst. 
There's a  wicked feeling  about this  place.' He  sniffed. 'And  a smell, I 
fancy. Do you notice it? A queer kind of a smell, stuffy. I don't like it.' 
     'I don't like anything here at all.' said Frodo, `step or stone, breath 
or bone. Earth, air and water all seem accursed. But so our path is laid.' 
     'Yes, that's so,'  said Sam. `And we shouldn't be here at all,  if we'd 
known more about it before we started. But I  suppose  it's often  that way. 
The brave things  in the old  tales and songs,  Mr. Frodo: adventures,  as I 
used to call them. I used to think that they were things  the wonderful folk  
of the stories  went out and looked  for,  because they wanted them, because 
they were exciting and  life was a bit dull, a kind of a sport, as you might 
say. But that's not the  way of it with the tales  that  really mattered, or  
the  ones that stay in the mind. Folk seem to have been just landed in them, 
usually -- their paths were laid that way, as you put it. But  I expect they 
had lots of chances, like us, of turning back, only they didn't. And if they 
had, we  shouldn't know, because they'd have  been  forgotten. We hear about 
those as just went on  -- and not all to a  good end, mind you; at least not 
to what  folk  inside a story and not outside it call a good  end. You know,  
coming home, and finding things all right, though not quite the same  -- like 
old Mr Bilbo.  But those aren't always  the best tales to  hear, though they 
may be the  best tales to get landed in! I wonder what sort of a tale  we've 
fallen into?  ' 
     `I wonder,' said Frodo. 'But I don't know. And that's the way of a real 
tale. Take any one that you're fond of. You may know, or guess, what kind of 
a  tale it is, happy -ending or sad-ending, but the people  in it don't know.  
And you don't want them to.' 
     'No, sir, of course not. Beren now,  he  never thought he was  going to 
get that Silmaril from the  Iron Crown in Thangorodrim, and yet he did,  and 
that was a worse place and a blacker danger than ours.  But  that's  a  long 
tale, of course, and goes on past the happiness and into grief and beyond it 
-- and the  Silmaril  went  on and  came to Edrendil. And why, sir, I  never  
thought of that before! We've got  -- you've got some  of  the light of it in 
that star-glass  that the Lady gave you! Why,   to  think of it, we're in the 

####-same tale still! It's going on. Don't the great tales never end? ' 
     'No, they  never  end  as  tales,' said Frodo.  `But the people in them 
come, and go when their part's ended. Our part will end later  -- or sooner.' 
     'And then we can have some rest and  some sleep,' said Sam.  He laughed  
grimly.  'And I  mean just  that, Mr. Frodo. I mean plain ordinary rest, and 
sleep, and  waking up  to a morning's work in the garden. I'm afraid  that's 
all I'm hoping for all the time. All the big important  plans are not for my 
sort. Still, I wonder if we shall ever be put into songs  or tales. We're in 
one,  or course; but I mean: put into words, you know, told by the fireside, 
or read out of a great big book with red  and black letters, years and years 
afterwards. And people will say: "Let's hear about Frodo and the Ring! " And 
they'll say: "Yes, that's one of my favourite stories. Frodo was very brave. 
wasn't he, dad?"  "Yes, my boy, the  famousest of  the hobbits,  and  that's 
saying a lot."' 
     `It's saying a lot too much,' said Frodo, and he laughed,  a long clear 
laugh from  his heart. Such a sound had not been heard in those places since 
Sauron came to Middle-earth. To Sam suddenly it seemed as if all the  stones 
were listen ing and the  tall rocks leaning over them. But Frodo did not heed 
them;  he laughed again. 'Why, Sam,' he said, 'to hear you somehow makes  me 
as merry as if the story was already written. But you've left out one of the 
chief characters: Samwise the stouthearted. "I  want to hear more about Sam, 
dad. Why  didn't they put  in more of his talk, dad? That's  what I like, it 
makes me laugh. And Frodo wouldn't have  got far without Sam, would he, 
dad? 
"  ' 
     `Now, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'you shouldn't make fun. I was serious. ' 
     `So  was I,' said Frodo, 'and so I am. We're  going on a bit  too fast. 
You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the worst places of the story, and it  is 
all too likely that some will say at this point: "Shut the book now, dad; we 
don't want to read any more." ' 
     `Maybe,' said Sam, 'but I wouldn't be one to say that.  Things done and 
over and made into part of the great  tales are  different. Why, even Gollum 
might be  good in a  tale,  better than he is to have by you, anyway. And he 
used to like  tales himself once, by his own  account. I wonder if he thinks 
he's the hero or the villain?  
     `Gollum!' he called. `Would  you like to be the hero  -- now where's  he 
got to again?' 

####-     There was no  sign of  him at  the mouth  of their shelter nor  in  the 
shadows near. He had refused their food, though he had, as usual, accepted a  
mouthful of water; and then  he had seemed to curl up for a sleep:  They had 
supposed that one at any  rate of his objects  in his  long absence  the day 
befor e had been to hunt for food to his own liking; and now he had evidently 
slipped off again while they talked. But what for this time?  
     `I don't like his sneaking off without saying,' said Sam. 'And least of 
all now. He can't  be looking for food up here, not unless there's some kind 
of rock he fancies. Why, there isn't even a bit of moss! ' 
     `It's no  good worrying about him now,'  said  Frodo. `We couldn't have 
got so  far,  not even within  sight of the pass, without  him, and so we'll 
have to put up with his ways. If he's false, he's false.' 
     'All the same, I'd  rather have  him under  my eye,' said Sam. 'All the 
more so, if  he's false. Do you remember he never would say if this pass was 
guarded or no? And now we see a  tower there -- and it may be deserted,  and 
it may  not. Do  you think he's gone to fetch  them, Orcs  or  whatever they 
are?' 
     `No,  I  don't  think  so,'  answered Frodo.  'Even if he's up  to some 
wickedness, and I suppose that's not unlikely, I don't think it's  that: no t 
to  fetch Orcs,  or  any servants of the  Enemy.  Why wait till now,  and go 
through all the labour of the climb, and come so near the land  he fears? He 
could probably have  betrayed us to Orcs many times since we met him. No, if 
it's  anything,  it wil l  be some  little private trick of  his  own-that he 
thinks is quite secret.' 
     `Well,  I suppose  you're  right, Mr.  Frodo,'  said Sam.  'Not that it 
comforts me mightily. I don't make no  mistake:  I  don't doubt he'd hand me  
over  to Orcs  as  gladly  as kiss  his hand.  But  I was forgetting --  his 
Precious. No, I  suppose the  whole  time it's  been The  Precious for  poor 
Smjagol. That's the one idea in  all his little schemes, if he has any.  But 
how bringing us up here will help him in that is more than I can guess.' 
     'Very  likely  he can't guess himself,' said Frodo. `And I don't  think  
he's got just  one plain scheme in his muddled head. I think he really is in 
part trying to save the Precious from the Enemy. as long as he can. For that 
would be the last  disaster for himself too. if the Enemy got it. And in the 
other part, perhaps, he's just biding his time and waiting on chance.' 
     'Yes, Slinker  and Stinker, as I've said before,'  said  Sam.  'But the 
nearer they get to the  Enemy's land the more like Stinker Slinker will get. 

####-Mark my words: if ever we get to the pass, he  won't let us really take  the 
precious thing over the border without making some kind of trouble.' 
     `We haven't got there yet,' said Frodo. 
     'No, but we'd better keep our eyes skinned till we do.  If we're caught 
napping, Stinker will come out on top pretty quick. Not but what it would be 
safe for you to have a wink now, master.  Safe, if you lay close  to me. I'd 
be dearly glad to see you have a sleep. I'd keep watch over you; and anyway, 
if you lay near, with my arm round you, no one could come pawing you 
without 
your Sam knowing it.' 
     `Sleep!'  said  Frodo and sighed, as if out of  a desert  he had seen a  
mirage of cool green. 'Yes, even here I could sleep.' 
     `Sleep then, master! Lay your head in my lap.' 
     And so Gollum found  them hours later, when  he returned,  crawling and  
creeping down the path out  of the gloom ahead. Sam sat  propped against the 
stone, his head dropping  sideways and his   breathing heavy. In his  lap lay 
Frodo's head,  drowned deep in  sleep; upon his white  forehead lay  one  of 
Sam's brown hands, and the  other lay softly upon his master's breast. Peace 
was in both their faces.  
     Gollum looked at them. A strange expression passed over his lean hungry 
face.  The gleam faded from his eyes,  and they went dim and grey,  old  and  
tired. A spasm of pain seemed to twist him, and he turned away, peering back 
up towards  the  pass,  shaking  his head, as  if engaged in  some   interior  
debate. Then he came back, and  slowly  putting out  a trembling  hand, very 
cautiously he touched Frodo's knee  -- but almost the touch was a caress. For  
a fleeting moment,  could one of the sleepers have seen him, they would have 
thought that they beheld an old weary hobbit, shrunken by the years that had 
carried him far beyond his time, beyond friends and kin,  and the fields and 
streams of youth, an old starved pitiable thing. 
     But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in  his sleep, and 
immediately Sam was wide awake. The first thing he saw was Gollum  -- 
`pawing 
at master,' as he thought. 
     `Hey you!' he said roughly. `What are you up to?' 
     'Nothing, nothing,' said Gollum softly. `Nice Master!' 
     `I daresay,' said Sam. 'But where have you been to  -- sneaking off and 
sneaking back, you old villain? ' 

####-     Gollum withdrew himself, and a green glint  flickered under  his  heavy 
lids. Almost  spider -like  he  looked now, crouched  back on his bent limbs, 
with his  protruding eyes. The fleeting  moment  had  passed, beyond recall.  
`Sneaking,  sneaking!'  he  hissed.  'Hobbits always  so polite, yes. O nice 
hobbits! Smjagol brings them  up secret  ways that  nobody else  could find.  
Tired he is, thirsty  he is, yes thirsty; and he guides them and he searches 
for paths, and they say sneak, sneak. Very nice friends,  O yes my precious,  
very nice.' 
     Sam felt  a bit remorseful, though not more trustful. 'Sorry.' he said. 
'I'm sorry, but you startled me out of my sleep. And I  shouldn't  have been 
sleeping, and that made me a bit sharp.  But Mr.  Frodo.  he's that tired, I 
asked him to have a wink; and well,  that's how it is. Sorry. But where have 
you been to? ' 
     `Sneaking,' said Gollum, and the green glint did not leave his  eyes. 
     'O very well,' said Sam, `have it your own way! I don't suppose it's so 
far  from the truth. And now  we'd  better all  be  sneaking along together. 
What's the time? Is it today or tomorrow? ' 
     'It's tomorrow,' said Gollum, 'or this  was  tomorrow when hobbits went 
to sleep. Very foolish, very dangerous-if poor Smjagol wasn't sneaking about 
to watch.' 
     `I think we shall  get tired  of that word soon,' said Sam. 'But  never  
mind.  I'll  wake master up.' Gently he smoothed the hair back  fr om Frodo's 
brow, and bending down spoke softly to him. 
     `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up! ' 
     Frodo stirred  and  opened  his  eyes,  and  smiled, seeing Sam's  face 
bending over him.  `Calling me early  aren't you,  Sam?' he said. `It's dark 
still!  ' 
     'Yes  it's  always  dark here,' said  Sam. `But Gollum's come  back Mr. 
Frodo, and he says it's tomorrow. So we must be walking on. The last lap.' 
     Frodo drew a deep breath  and sat up. `The last lap! ' he said. 'Hullo, 
Smjagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest? ' 
     `No food, no rest, nothing for Smjagol,' said Gollum. `He's a sneak.' 
     Sam clicked his tongue, but restrained himself. 
     'Don't  take  names to  yourself,  Smjagol,'  said Frodo. 'It's  unwise 
whether they are true or false.' 
     `Smjagol has to take what's given  him,' answered Gollum. 'He was given 
that name by kind Master Samwise, the hobbit that knows so much.' 

####-     Frodo looked at Sam. 'Yes sir,' he said. `I did use the word, waking up 
out of my sleep sudden and all  and finding him at hand. I said I was sorry, 
but I soon shan't be.' 
     'Come, let it pass then,' said Frodo. 'But now we seem to have  come to 
the point, you and  I, Smjagol. Tell me. Can we  find the rest of the way by 
ourselves?  We're in sight of  the pass, of a way in, and  if we can find it 
now, then I suppose our agreement can be said to be over. You have done what 
you promised,  and  you're free: free to go back to food  and rest, wherever  
you wish to  go, except to servants  of the Enemy. And one   day I may reward 
you, I or those that remember me.' 
     `No,  no,  not  yet,'  Gollum whined. `O no!  They  can't  find the way 
themselves, can they? O no indeed. There's the tunnel coming.  Smjagol  must  
go on. No rest. No food. Not yet.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. Shelob's Lair 

 
 
     It  may indeed have been  daytime now, as Gollum said, but the  hobbits 
could see little difference, unless, perhaps, the heavy sky above  was  less 
utterly  black,  more like  a  great roof  of smoke; while  instead  of  the 
darkness  of deep night, which lingered still in  cracks and  holes, a  grey 
blurring shadow shrouded the stony world  about them. They passed on, 
Gollum 
in front and the hobbits  now side by side, up the long  ravine  between the 
piers  and columns of torn and wea thered  rock, standing like huge  unshapen 
statues on  either hand. There was no  sound. Some way ahead, a mile  or so,  
perhaps,   was  a  great  grey  wall,  a   last  huge  upthrusting  mass  of 
mountain-stone. Darker it loomed, and steadily it rose as  they  approached, 
until it towered up high above them, shutting  out the view of all that  lay 
beyond. Deep shadow lay before its feet. Sam sniffed the air. 
     `Ugh! That smell!' he said. `It's getting stronger and stronger.' 
     Presently they were under the shadow, and there in the midst of it they 
saw the  opening  of a cave. `This is the way in,' said Gollum softly. `This 
is  the entrance to the tunnel.' He did  not speak its name:  Torech  Ungol, 
Shelob's Lair. Out of it came a stench, not the sickly odour of decay in the 
meads  of  Morgul, but a foul  reek,  as if filth  unnameable were piled and 
hoarded in the dark within. 
     `Is this the only way, Smjagol? ' said Frodo. 
     'Yes, yes,' he answered. 'Yes, we must go this way now.' 
     'D'you mean to say you've been through this hole?' said Sam. `Phew! But 
perhaps you don't mind bad smells.' 
     Gollum's  eyes  glinted. `He  doesn't  know  what  we  minds,  does  he 
precious? No,  he  doesn't.  But Smjagol  can  bear things.  Yes.  He's been 
through. O yes, right through. It's the only way.' 
     `And what makes the smell, I  wonder,'  said Sam. `It's like  -- well, I 
wouldn't  like to say. Some beastly  hole of the  Orcs, I'll warrant, with a  
hundred years of their filth in it.' 
     'Well,'  said Frodo, 'Orcs or  no, if  it's the only  way, we must take 
it.' 
     Drawing a  deep breath they passed inside. In  a few steps they were in 

####-utter and impenetrable dark. Not since the lightless passages  of  Moria had 
Frodo or  Sam known such darkness, and if  possible  here it was  deeper and 
denser. There,  there were airs moving,  and echoes,  and a sense  of space. 
Here the air was still, stagnant, heavy, and sound fell dead. They walked as 
it were  in a black vapour wrought of veritable darkness itsel f that, as  it 
was breathed,  brought blindness not only  to the  eyes but to the mind,  so 
that even the memory of colours and of  forms and of any light faded out  of 
thought. Night always had been, and always would be, and night was all. 
     But for a while  they could still feel, and  indeed the senses of their 
feet and fingers at first seemed sharpened almost painfully. The walls felt, 
to their surprise, smooth, and the floor, save for a step now and again, was 
straight and even, going ever  up  at the  same stiff slope. The  tunnel was 
high  and  wide,  so wide  that,  though  the hobbits  walked abreast,  only 
touching the side-walls with their  outstretched hands, they were separated, 
cut off alone in the darkness.  
     Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead. While 
they were still able to give heed to such things, they could hear his breath 
hissing and  gasping just in  front of them.  But  after a time their senses 
became duller, both touch and hearing seemed to grow numb, and they kept on, 
groping, walking, on and on, mainly by the force of the will with which they 
had  entered, will to go through and desire to come at last to the high gate 
beyond.  
     Before  they  had gone  very far, perhaps, but time and  distance  soon 
passed out of  his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling  the wall, was aware 
that there was an opening at the side: for a moment he caught a faint breath 
of some air less heavy, and then they passed it by. 
     'There's more  than one passage here,'  he whispered with an effort: it 
seemed hard to make his breath give any  sound. `It's as orc-like a place as 
ever there could be! ' 
     After that, first he on  the right, and  then Frodo on the left, passed 
three or four such openings, some wider, some smaller; but  there was as yet 
no doubt of  the main way,  for it was straight, and did not turn, and still 
went steadily up. But how long was it, how much more of this would they have 
to  endure, or could they  endure? The breathlessness of the air was growing 
as they climbed; and now they seemed often  in the  blind dark to sense some 
resistance  thicker  than  the  foul air. As they  thrust forward they  felt 
things brush against their heads, or against their hands, long tentacles, or  

####-hanging growths perhaps:  they could not tell what  they were. And still the 
stench grew. It grew, until almost it seemed to them that smell was the only 
clear sense left t¢  them. and  that was for their torment.  One  hour,  two 
hours,  three  hours: how many  had  they  passed  in  this  lightless  hole?  
Hours-days, weeks rather. Sam left the tunnel -side and shrank towards Frodo, 
and their hands met and clasped. and so together they still went on. 
     At length Frodo, groping along the  left-hand  wall, came suddenly to a  
void. Almost he fell sideways  into the emptiness. Here was some  opening in 
the rock far  wider than any  they had yet passed; and out of it came a reek  
so foul, and a sense of lurking malice so intense, that Frodo reeled. And at 
that moment Sam too lurched and fell forwards.  
     Fighting off both the sickness and  the fear, Frodo gripped Sam's hand. 
`Up!  ' he said in  a hoarse breath without  voice. 'It all comes from here, 
the stench and the peril. Now for it! Quick! ' 
     Calling up his remaining strength and resolution, he dragged Sam to his 
feet, and  forced his own limbs to move. Sam  stumbled beside him. One step, 
two steps, three steps-at last six steps. Maybe they had passed the dreadful 
unseen opening, but  whether  that was so  or not, suddenly it was easier to 
move,  as if  some  hostile will  for the moment  had  released  them.  They 
struggled on, still hand in hand. 
     But almost at once they came to a new difficulty. The tunnel forked, or  
so it  seemed, and in the dark they could  not tell wh ich was the wider way, 
or  which kept nearer to the straight. Which should they take, the  left, or  
the  right? They knew of  nothing  to guide  them, yet a false choice  would 
almost certainly be fatal. 
     `Which way has Gollum gone? ' panted Sam. 'And why didn't he wait? ' 
     `Smjagol!  ' said  Frodo,  trying  to  call. 'Smjagol! '  But his voice 
croaked, and the  name fell dead almost as  it left his lips.  There  was no 
answer, not an echo, not even a tremor of the air. 
     `He's really gone this time, I  fancy,'  muttered Sam. `I guess this is 
just exactly where  he meant to bring us. Gollum! If ever I lay hands on you  
again, you'll be sorry for it.' 
     Presently,  groping  and fumbling  in  the  dark, they  found  that the 
opening on the left wa s blocked: either it was  a blind, or else  some great 
stone had fallen in  the passage. 'This can't be the way,'  Frodo whispered. 
'Right or wrong, we must take the other.' 
     'And quick! ' Sam panted. 'There's something worse than Gollum about. I  

####-can feel something looking at us.' 
     They had not gone  more than a  few yards  when from behind them came a  
sound,  startling and horrible in  the  heavy  padded  silence: a  gurgling, 
bubbling noise, and  a  long  venomous hiss. They wheeled round, but nothing 
could be seen. Still as stones they stood, staring, waiting for they did not 
know what. 
     `It's  a trap!' said Sam, and he  laid his hand upon  the  hilt  of his 
sword; and  as he did so, he thought of the darkness of the barrow whence it  
came. 'I   wish  old  Tom was near us  now!' he  thought.  Then  as he stood, 
darkness  about him and a  blackness of  despair and  anger in his heart. it 
seemed  to him that he saw a  light:  a light in his mind, almost unbearably 
bright at first, as a sun-ray to the eyes of one long hidden in a windowless  
pit. Then  the light became colour: green,  gold, silver, white. Far off, as 
in  a  little  picture drawn  by  elven-fingers  he  saw  the Lady Galadriel 
standing on the  grass  in  Lurien,  and gifts  were  in her hands. And you, 
Ring-bearer, he  heard her say,  remote  but clear, for you  I have prepared  
this. 
     The bubbling hiss  drew nearer,  and there  was a  creaking as  of some 
great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark. A reek came on 
before it. 'Master, master!' cried Sam, and the  life and  urgency came back  
into his voice. 'The Lady's  gift! The star-glass! A light  to you  in  dark 
places, she said it was to be. The star-glass!  ' 
     `The star-glass?' muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep, hardly 
comprehending.  `Why  yes! Why had  I forgotten it? A  light when all  other 
lights go out! And now indeed light alone can help us.' 
     Slowly his hand went to his bosom, and slowly he held  aloft the  Phial 
of Galadriel. For a moment it glimmered, faint as  a rising star  struggling 
in heavy earthward  mists,  and then as its power waxed,  and hope  grew  in 
Frodo's  mind, it  began to  burn, and kindled to a  silver flame, a  minute 
heart of dazzling light, as though Edrendil  had himself come down  from the 
high sunset paths with the last Silmaril upon his brow. The darkness receded 
from it until it seemed to shine in the  centre of a globe of  airy crystal, 
and the hand that held it sparkled with white fire. 
     Frodo gazed  in   wonder at this marvellous  gift  that  he  had so long 
carried, not guessing its full  worth and potency. Seldom had  he remembered 
it on the road, until they came to Morgul Vale, and never had he used it for  
fear of its revealing  light.  Aiya Edrendil Elenion Ancalima! he cried, and 

####-knew  not what he had spoken; for it seemed that another voice spoke through 
his, clear, untroubled by the foul air of the pit. 
     But other  potencies  there are in  Middle-earth, powers of night,  and 
they are  old and strong. And She that  walked in the darkness had heard the 
Elves cry that cry far back in the deeps of time, and she had not heeded it, 
and it did  not daunt her now. Even as Frodo spoke he  felt  a great  malice 
bent upon him, and a deadly regard considering him. Not far down the tunnel, 
between them  and the  opening where  they  had reeled and stumbled, he  was 
aware of eyes  growing visible, two great clusters  of many-windowed eyes  -- 
the  coming menace was unmasked at last.  The radiance of the star -gla ss was 
broken and thrown back from their thousand  facets, but behind the glitter a  
pale deadly fire began steadily to glow within, a flame kindled in some deep 
pit of  evil thought. Monstrous and  abominable eyes they were, bestial  and  
yet filled with purpose  and with  hideous delight, gloating over their prey 
trapped beyond all hope of escape. 
     Frodo  and  Sam, horror -stricken, began slowly to back away,  their own 
gaze held by the dreadful stare of those baleful eyes; but as they backed so  
the eyes  advanced. Frodo's hand wavered, and slowly the Phial drooped. Then 
suddenly,  released from  the  holding spell to run  a little while  in vain 
panic for the amusement of the eyes, they both turned and fled together; but 
even as they ran Frodo looked back and saw with terror that at once the eyes 
came leaping up behind. The stench of death was like a cloud about him. 
     'Stand! stand! ' he cried desperately. `Running is no use.' 
     Slowly the eyes crept nearer. 
     `Galadriel! ' he called, and  gathering his  courage  he  lifted up the 
Phial once more. The eyes  halted. For a moment  their regard relaxed, as if 
some hint of doubt troubled them. Then Frodo's heart flamed  within him, and 
without thinking what he did, whether it was folly or despair or  courage, he 
took the Phial in  his left  hand,  and  with his right hand drew his sword. 
Sting flashed out, and the sharp elven-blade  sparkled in the silver  light, 
but at  its edges a  blue fire  flicked. Then holding the star aloft and the 
bright sword advanced,  Frodo,  hobbit of the Shire, walked steadily down to 
meet the eyes. 
     They wavered. Doubt  came into them as the light approached. One by one 
they dimmed,  and  slowly they drew back. No brightness so  deadly  had ever  
afflicted  them  before. From sun  and  moon and star  they  had  been  safe 
underground,  but now a star  had descended  into  the  very earth. Still it 

####-approached, and the eyes began to quail. One by one they all went dark; they 
turned  away, and a great bulk,  beyond  the light's reach,  heaved its huge 
shadow in between. They were gone. 
     'Master, master!' cried Sam. He was close behind,  his own  sword drawn 
and ready. 'Stars  and glory!  But the Elves would make a song  of  that, if 
ever they heard of it! And may I live   to tell them and hear them sing.  But 
don't go  on, master. Don't go down to that den! Now's our only chance.  Now 
let's get out of this foul hole!' 
     And  so back they turned once more, first walking and then running; for  
as they  went the  floor  of   the tunnel rose steeply, and with every stride 
they climbed higher  above  the stenches  of  the  unseen lair, and strength 
returned  to  limb and  heart.  But still the hatred of  the  Watcher lurked 
behind  them, blind for a while,  perhaps,  but undefeated,  still  bent  on 
death. And  now there came  a  flow of air  to meet them, cold and thin. The 
opening, the tunnel's end, at last it was before them. Panting, yearning for  
a roofless place, they flung themselves forward, and  then in amazement they 
staggered, tumbling back. The outlet was blocked  with some barrier, but not 
of  stone: soft  and a  little  yielding  it  seemed,  and  yet  strong  and 
impervious; air filtered through, hut not a  glimmer of any light. Once more 
they charged and were hurled back. 
     Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and  before him he  saw a greyness 
which the radiance of the star-glass did not pierce  and did not illuminate, 
as  if it  were  a  shadow that  being cast  by  no  light,  no  light could 
dissipate. Across the  width and height of the  tunnel a  vast web was spun, 
orderly as the web of some huge spider,  but  denser -woven  and far greater,  
and each thread was as thick as rope. 
     Sam  laughed grimly.  `Cobwebs! '  he said. `Is that all?  Cobwebs! But 
what a spider! Have at 'em, down with 'em! ' 
     In a fury he  hewed at  them with his  sword,  but  the thread  that he 
struck did  not break.  It gave a little and then sprang back like a plucked 
bowstring,  turning the blade and tossing up both sword and a rm. Three times 
Sam struck with all  his  force, and  at last  one single cord  of  all  the 
countless  cords snapped and twisted, curling and whipping through  the air.  
One end of it lashed Sam's hand, and he cried out in pain, starting back and 
drawing h is hand across his mouth. 
     `It will take days to clear the road like this,' he said. `What's to be 
done? Have those eyes come back? ' 

####-     `No, not  to be seen,' said  Frodo.  `But  I still  feel  that they are 
looking at me,  or  thinking about me: making some  other plan,  perhaps. If 
this light were lowered, or if it failed, they would quickly come again.' 
     `Trapped in the end!  ' said Sam bitterly, his anger rising again above 
weariness and despair. `Gnats  in a net. May the curse of Faramir bite  that 
Gollum and bite him quick! ' 
     'That would not help us now,' said Frodo. `Come! Let us see what  Sting 
can  do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the dark ravines 
of  Beleriand where it was forged.  But you must be the  guard and hold back 
the eyes. Here,  take  the  star -glass.  Do  not be afraid. Hold  it  up and 
watch!' 
     Then Frodo stepped up to the great grey  net, and hewed it  with a wide 
sweeping stroke,  drawing  the  bitter  edge  swiftly  across  a  ladder  of 
close-strung cords, and  at  once  springing  away. The  blue-gleaming blade 
shore through them like a scythe through grass, and they  leaped and writhed 
and then hung loose. A great rent was made. 
     Stroke  after  stroke he dealt, until at last  all the  web within  his 
reach was shattered, and the upper portion blew and swayed like a loose veil  
in the incoming wind. The trap was broken. 
     `Come! ' cried Frodo. `On! On! ' Wild joy at their escape from the very 
mouth  of despair suddenly filled  all his mind. His head whirled as  with a  
draught of potent wine. He sprang out, shouting as he came. 
     It seemed light in that  dark land to his eyes  that had passed through 
the den of night. The great smokes had risen and grown thinner, and the last  
hours of a  sombre day were passing; the red glare of Mordor had died away in 
sullen gloom. Yet it seemed to Frodo that he looked upon a morning of sudden 
hope. Almost he had reached  the  summit of the  wall. Only  a little higher  
now. The Cleft,  Cirith  Ungol, was before him, a dim  notch  in  the  black  
ridge, and the horns of rock darkling  in  the sky on either side.  A  short 
race, a sprinter's course and he would be through!  
     `The pass,  Sam! ' he  cried, not heeding the shrillness of  his voice, 
that  released  from  the choking airs of the  tunnel  rang out now high and 
wild. 'The  pass! Run, run, and we'll be  through-through before any one can 
stop us! ' 
     Sam came  up  behind as fast as he could  urge his legs; but glad as he 
was  to be free, he was uneasy, and as he ran, he kept on  glancing back  at 
the dark  arch of the tunnel, fearing to see eyes, or some  shape beyond his 

####-imagining,  spring out in  pursuit. Too little did he or  his master know of 
the craft of Shelob. She had many exits from her  lair. 
     There agelong she had dwelt, an evil thing in spider -form, even such as 
once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West that is now under  
the Sea, such as Beren fought in the Mountains of Terror  in Doriath, and so 
came to L®thien upon the green sward amid the hemlocks in the moonlight 
long 
ago. How Shelob came there, flying from ruin, no tale tells, for out  of the 
Dark  Years  few tales  have come. But still she was  there, who  was  there 
before Sauron, and before the first  stone of Barad-dyr; and she served none 
but herself, drinking the blood of Elves and Men, bloated and grown fat with 
endless  brooding on her  feasts,  weaving  webs of shadow;  for all  living 
things  were  her  food,  and her  vomit  darkness.  Far and wide her lesser  
broods, bastards  of the miserable mates, her own offspring,  that she slew,  
spread from  glen to glen, from the Ephel D®ath to the eastern hills, to Dol 
Guldur and the fastnesses of Mirkwood. But none could  rival her, Shelob the 
Great, last child of Ungoliant to trouble the unhappy world. 
     Already,  years before, Gollum had beheld her, Smjagol  who  pried into 
all dark  holes, and in past days he had  bowed  and worshipped her, and the 
darkness of  her evil will  walked through  all  the ways of  his  weariness 
beside him, cutting  him off from light and from regret. And he had promised 
to bring  her food. But her lust was  not his lust. Little  she  knew of  or  
cared for towers, or  rings, or  anything devised by mind  or hand, who only  
desired death for all others, mind and body, and for herself a glut of life. 
alone,  swollen  till  the  mountains  could no longer  hold her up and  the 
darkness could not contain her. 
     But that  desire  was yet far  away, and long  now had she been hungry, 
lurking  in  her den, while the power of  Sauron grew, and light and  living 
things forsook his borders; and the city in the valley was dead, and  no Elf 
or Man came near, only the unhappy Orcs. Poor  food  and  wary. But she must  
eat, and however busily  they delved new winding passages from  the pass and 
from their tower, ever she found  some way to snare them. But she lusted for  
sweeter meat. And Gollum had brought it to her. 
     `We'll see, we'll see,'  he  said often to himself, when the evil  mood 
was on him, as he walked the  dangerous road from  Emyn Muil to Morgul 
Vale, 
'we'll see. It may well be, O yes, it may well be  that when She throws away 

####-the bones  and the empty garments, we  shall find it, we  shall  get it, the 
Precious, a reward for poor Smjagol who brings nice food. And we'll save the 
Precious, as we promised. O yes.  And when we've  got  it  safe, then She'll 
know  it,  O  yes,  then we'll  pay  Her back,  my precious. Then  we'll pay 
everyone back! ' 
     So he thought in an inner chamber of  his cunning, which he still hoped 
to hide from  her,  even when he  had come  to her  again and had bowed  low 
before her while his companions slept. 
     And as for Sauron: he  knew where she lurked. It pleased  him that  she 
should dwell there hungry but unabated in  malice,  a more  sure  watch upon 
that  ancient  path into his land than any  other  that his skill could have 
devised. And Orcs, they were useful  slaves, but he  had them in  plenty. If 
now and again Shelob caught them to stay  her  appetite, she was welcome: he 
could spare them. And sometimes as  a man may cast a dainty to  his cat (his  
cat he calls her, but she owns him not) Sauron would send her prisoners that 
he had no better uses for: he would have them driven to her hole, and  report  
brought back to him of the play she made. 
     So  they  both lived, delighting in  their  own devices,  and feared no 
assault, nor wrath,  nor any end of their wickedness. Never yet had any  fly 
escaped from Shelob's webs, and the greater now was her rage and hunger. 
     But  nothing of this evil which they had stirred  up against  them  did 
poor Sam  know, except that a  fear  was growing on him, a menace  which  he 
could not see; and such a weight  did it  become that it was a burden to him 
to run, and his feet seemed leaden. 
     Dread was round him, and enemies before him in the pass, and his master 
was in a fey mood  running  heedlessly to meet them. Turning  his  eyes away 
from the shadow behind and the deep  gloom  beneath the cliff upon his left, 
he looked  ahead, and he saw two things  that increased his  dismay.  He saw 
that the sword  which  Frodo still held unsheathed was glittering  with blue 
flame; and he saw that though the sky behind was now dark. still the  window 
in the tower was g lowing red. 
     `Orcs! '  he muttered. `We'll never rush  it  like  this.  There's Orcs 
about, and  worse than Orcs.' Then  returning  quickly to his  long habit of 
secrecy, he closed  his  hand about the precious Phial  which he still bore. 
Red  with his own living blood  his  hand  shone for  a moment, and then  he 
thrust  the revealing light deep into  a pocket near his breast and drew his 
elven-cloak about him.  Now he tried  to  quicken his pace.  His master  was 

####-gaining on him; already he was some twenty strides ahead, flitting on like a  
shadow; soon he would be lost to sight in that grey world. 
     Hardly had  Sam hidden the light  of  the star -glass  when she came.  A 
little way ahead and to his left he saw suddenly, issuing  from a black hole 
of  shadow under the cliff, the most loathly  shape that he had ever beheld, 
horrible beyond the horror of an evil dream. Most like a spider she was, but 
huger than  the great hunting beasts, and more terrible than they because of 
the evil  purpose  in her remorseless eyes.  Those  same  eyes  that  he had 
thought daunted and defeated, there  they were lit with a fell light  again, 
clustering in her out-thrust head. Great horns she had, and behind her short 
stalk -like neck was her huge swollen body,  a vast bloated bag, swaying  and 
sagging  between  her legs; its great  bulk was black,  blotched  with livid 
marks, but  the belly underneath  was pale  and  luminous  and  gave forth a  
stench. Her legs were bent, with great  knobbed joints high  above her back, 
and hairs that stuck out like steel spines, and at each leg's end  there was 
a claw. 
     As soon as she had  squeezed her  soft  squelching  body and its folded 
limbs out of the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a  horrible speed, 
now running on her creaking legs, now making a sudden bound. She was 
between 
Sam  and his master. Either she did  not see Sam, or she avoided him for the 
moment as  the bearer of the  light` and fixed all her intent upon one prey, 
upon Frodo,  bereft of  his Phial, running heedless up the path, unaware yet 
of his  peril. Swiftly he ran, but Shelob was  swifter;  in a few  leaps she 
would have him. 
     Sam gasped and gathered  all his  remaining breath  to shout. 'Look out 
behind!  ' he yelled.  'Look  out  master!  I'm'  -- but suddenly his cry was 
stifled. 
     A long clammy hand went over his mouth and  another caught  him  by the 
neck, while something wrapped itself about his leg.  Taken off  his guard he 
toppled backwards into the arms of his attacker. 
     `Got him! ' hissed Gollum in his ear. `At  last, my precious, we've got 
him, yes, the nassty hobbit. We takes this one. She'll get the other. O yes, 
Shelob will get him,  not Smjagol: he promised; he won't hurt Master at all. 
But he's got you, you nassty filthy little sneak!' He spat on Sam's neck. 
     Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master was 
in  deadly  peril, gave  to Sam  a sudden violence and strength that was far 

####-beyond anything that Gollum had expected from this slow stupid hobbit, as he 
thought him.  Not Gollum  himself  could have twisted  more quickly  or more 
fiercely. His hold on Sam's mouth slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged 
forward 
again, trying to tear away from the grip on his neck. His sword was still in 
his hand, and on his   left arm,  hanging by  its thong, was Faramir's staff.  
Desperately  he tried to turn and stab his enemy. But Gollum  was too quick. 
His long right arm shot out, and he  grabbed  Sam's wrist:  his fingers were 
like a vice; slowly and relentlessly he bent the hand down and forward, till 
with a cry of pain Sam released the sword and it fell to the ground; and all 
the while Gollum's other hand was tightening on Sam's throat. 
     Then Sam played his last trick. With all his  strength  he  pulled away 
and got his feet firmly planted; then suddenly he drove his legs against the 
ground and with his whole force hurled himself backwards. 
     Not  expecting  even this simple trick from Sam, Gollum fell  over with 
Sam on top, and he received the weight of the sturdy hobbit in  his stomach.  
A sharp hiss came out  of him, and  for a second his hand upon  Sam's throat 
loosened;  but his  fingers still gripped the sword-hand. Sam  tore  himself 
forward  and  away,  and stood up, and then  quickly he wheeled away  to his 
right,  pivoted on the  wrist held by Gollum.  Laying hold of the staff with 
his  left hand,  Sam swung it up, and down it came with a whistling crack on 
Gollum's outstretched arm, just below the elbow.  
     With a squeal Gollum let go. Then  Sam  waded in; not waiting to change  
the staff from left to right he dealt another savage blow. Quick as  a snake 
Gollum slithered  aside. and the stroke aimed at his head  fell  across  his 
back. The staff  cracked and broke.  That was  enough for him. Grabbing from 
behind  was an old game of his,  and  seldom  had he failed in it.  But this 
time,  misled by spite,  he  had made the  mistake  of speaking and gloating 
before he had  both hands on his  victim's  neck. Everything  had gone wrong 
with  his beautiful plan,  since that horrible  light  had  so  unexpectedly 
appeared in the darkness. And now he was face to face with a furious  enemy, 
little less than his own size. This fight was not for him. Sam  swept up his 
sword from the ground and raised it. Gollum squealed , and springing aside on 
to all fours, he  jumped away in one big bound like a frog. Before Sam could 
reach him, he was off, running with amazing speed back towards the tunnel.  
     Sword in  hand  Sam  went  after him.  For the  moment he had forgotten  
everything else but the red fury in his brain and the desire to kill Gollum. 

####-But before he could overtake him, Gollum  was gone. Then  as the  dark  hole 
stood before him and the stench came out to meet him, like a clap of thunder  
the thought of Frodo  and the monster  smote upon Sam's mind. He spun round, 
and rushed wildly up the path, calling and calling his master's name. He was 
too late. So far Gollum's plot had succeeded. 
 

####- 

Chapter 10. The Choices of Master Samwise 

 
 
     Frodo was lying face upward  on the ground and the monster  was bending 
over  him, so intent  upon her victim  that she took  no heed of Sam and his 
cries, until  he was close at  hand. As he rushed up he  saw that Frodo  was 
already  bound  in  cords, wound about him from ankle to  shoulder,  and the  
monster with her great forelegs was beginning half to lift, half to drag his 
body away. 
     On  the near side of him lay, gleaming on  the ground, his elven-blade,  
where it had fallen useless from his grasp. Sam did not wait to  wonder wha t  
was to be  done, or whether he was brave, or loyal, or filled with rage.  He 
sprang  forward with a yell, and seized his master's sword in his left hand. 
Then he charged.  No onslaught more fierce was ever seen in the savage world 
of beasts; where  some  desperate  small creature  armed with  little  teeth 
alone,  will  spring  upon a tower of horn and  hide that  stands above  its 
fallen mate. 
     Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by his small yell she turned 
slowly the dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But almost before she was 
aware that a fury was upon her greater than any she  had known in  countless 
years,  the shining sword  bit upon her  foot  and shore away  the claw. Sam 
sprang in, inside the arches of  her legs, and  with a quick  upthrust of his 
other hand stabbed at  the clustered eyes upon her lowered  head. One  great 
eye went dark. 
     Now  the miserable creature was right under her, for the  moment out of 
the reach of her  sting and of her claws.  Her vast belly was above him with 
its putrid light, and the stench of it almost smote him down. Still his fury 
held for  one more blow, and  before she could sink upon him, smothering him 
and all his little impudence of courage, he  slashed  the bright elven-blade 
across her with desperate strength. 
     But Shelob was not as dragons are, no softer spot had she save only her 
eyes.  Knobbed  and pitted  with corruption  was her  age-old hide, but ever  
thickened from within with  layer on layer of evil  growth. The blade scored 
it with a dreadful gash, but those hideous folds could not be pierced by any 
strength of men, not though Elf or Dwarf should  forge the steel or the hand  
of Beren or of T®rin wield it. She yielded to the stroke, and then heaved up 

####-the great bag of her belly high above Sam's head. Poison frothed and bubbled 
from  the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge  bulk down  on 
him 
again.  Too  soon.  For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping  his own 
sword, with both hands he  held the  elven-blade  point upwards, fending off  
that ghastly roof; and  so  Shelob, with  the driving force of her own cruel 
will, with  strength greater than  any warrior's hand, thrust herself upon a  
bitter  spike.  Deep,  deep it pricked, as Sam was  crushed  slowly  to  the 
ground. 
     No such anguish  had  Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in  all 
her long  world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor, nor  
the most savage Orc  entrapped, had ever thus  endured  her, or set blade to 
her beloved flesh. A shudder  went through her.  Heaving up again, wrenching 
away  from the  pain,  she  bent her writhing limbs  beneath  her and sprang 
backwards in a convulsive leap. 
     Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses  reeling in the 
foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the 
mist before his eyes he was  aware  dimly of Frodo's face  and stubbornly he 
fought to  master himself and to drag himself out of the swoon that was upon 
him.  Slowly  he raised his head and saw her, only  a few paces away, eyeing 
him, her beak drabbling a spittle of venom,  and a green ooze trickling from 
below her wounded eye. There she crouched, her shuddering belly splayed 
upon 
the ground,  the great bows of her legs quivering, as she  gather ed  herself 
for another spring-this time to crush  and sting to death: no little bite of 
poison to  still the struggling of  her meat; this time  to slay and then to 
rend. 
     Even  as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing  his death in her  
eyes,  a  thought came  to him, as  if some remote voice had  spoken. and he 
fumbled in his breast with his left hand, and found what he sought: cold and 
hard  and  solid  it seemed to  his touch  in a phantom world of horror, the 
Phial of Galadriel. 
     'Galadr iel!  ' he said  faintly, and  then he heard voices far off  but 
clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in the beloved 
shadows of the  Shire, and  the music  of the Elves as  it came  through his 
sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond. 
     Gilthoniel A Elbereth! 

####-     And then his tongue was loosed and  his voice cried in a language which  
he did not know:  
     A Elbereth Gilthoniel 
     o menel palan-diriel, 
     le nallon sn di'nguruthos! 
     A tiro nin, Fanuilos! 
     And  with  that  he staggered  to  his feet and was Samwise the hobbit, 
Hamfast's son, again. 
     `Now come, you filth!' he cried. `You've hurt my master, you brute, and 
you'll pay for it. We're going on; but we'll settle with you first. Come on, 
and taste it again!' 
     As  if his indomitable spirit had set  its potency in motion, the glass 
blazed  suddenly like a white torch in his  hand. It flamed like a star that 
leaping from the firmament sears  the  dark  air with  intolerable light. No 
such terror out of heaven had ever burned in Shelob's face before. The beams 
of it entered into her wounded head  and scored it with unbearable pain, and 
the  dreadful  infection of light  spread  from  eye to  eye. She  fell back  
beating  the air with her  forelegs, her   sight blasted by inner lightnings,  
her  mind  in agony. Then turning her maimed head away, she rolled aside and 
began to crawl, claw by claw, towards the opening in the dark cliff behind. 
     Sam came  on. He was reeling like a drunken man,  but he came  on.  And 
Shelob cowed at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivered  as she  tried 
to  hasten from him. She  reached  the hole,  and  squeezing down, leaving a  
trail of green-yellow slime, she slipped in, even as Sam hewed a last stroke 
at her dragging legs. Then he fell to the ground. 
     Shelob was  gone; and  whether she lay  long in her  lair, nursing  her  
malice  and her misery, and  in slow years of darkness  healed  herself from 
within, rebuilding her clustered eyes, until with hunger like death she spun 
once more her dreadful snares in the glens of the Mountains of  Shadow, this 
tale does not tell. 
     Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening  of the Nameless Land  fell 
upon the place of battle, he crawled back to his master. 
     'Master, dear master,' he said, but Frodo did not  speak. As he had run 
forward, eager, rejoicing  to be  free,  Shelob  with hideous speed had come 
behind and with one swift stroke had stung him in the neck. He lay now pale, 
and heard no voice. and did not move. 
     `Master, dear  master! ' said Sam, and through  a long  silence waited. 

####-listening in vain. 
     Then as quickly as he could he  cut away the binding cords and laid his 
head upon  Frodo's  breast and to his mouth, but  no stir of life  could  he 
find, nor  feel  the  faintest flutter of  the  heart. Often  he chafed  his 
master's hands and feet, and touched his brow, but all were cold. 
     `Frodo, Mr. Frodo! ' he called. 'Don't leave me here alone!  It's  your 
Sam calling. Don't go  where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  O wake up, 
Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!' 
     Then anger surged over hint,  and he ran  about his master's body in  a  
rage,  stabbing the air,  and smiting the  stones, and shouting  challenges.  
Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo's face, pale beneath him 
in the  dusk.  And  suddenly  he  saw that he was  in the  picture  that was 
revealed to him in the mirror of Galadriel in Lurien: Frodo with a pale face 
lying fast asleep under  a great  dark cliff. Or fast asleep he had  thought 
then. `He's dead! ' he said. 'Not asleep, dead! ' And  as he  said it, as if 
the words had set the venom to its work again. it seemed to him that the hue 
of the face grew livid green. 
     And  then black despair came down  on him, and Sam bowed to the ground, 
and drew his grey hood over his head, and night came into  his heart, and he 
knew no more. 
     When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about 
him; but for how many  minutes or  hours the world had  gone dragging on  he 
could not  tell. He was still in  the  same place,  and still his master lay 
beside him dead. The mountains had not crumbled  nor  the earth fallen  into 
ruin. 
     'What shall I do, what shall I do? ' he said.  `Did I come all this way 
with h im for  nothing? ' And then he remembered his own voice speaking 
words 
that at the time he  did not  understand  himself, at the beginning of their 
journey: I have something to do before the end. I must see  it through, sir, 
if you understand . 
     `But what can I do? Not leave  Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on  the  top of 
the mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on?' he repeated, and for  a 
moment 
doubt and fear  shook him. `Go on?  Is  that what I've  got to do? And leave 
him?' 
     Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body, 

####-and folded his cold hands upon his breast,  and wrapped his cloak about him; 
and he laid  his own sword at one side, and the staff that Faramir had given 
at the other. 
     'If I'm  to  go on,' he  said,  `then  I must take your sword,  by your 
leave, Mr. Frodo, but I'll put this one to lie by you, as it lay by the  old 
king in the barrow; and you've got your beautiful mithril coat from  old Mr. 
Bilbo. And  your star-glass, Mr. Frodo, you did lend it to me and I'll  need 
it, for I'll be  always in the dark now. It's too good  for me, and the Lady 
gave it  to you, but maybe she'd understand. Do  you  understand, Mr. Frodo? 
I've got to go on.' 
     But he could not  go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo's hand and could 
not release it. And time went  by and  still he knelt, holding  his master's 
hand, and in his heart keeping a debate. 
     Now he tried to find strength to tear himself  away and go  on a lonely 
journey -- for vengeance. If once he could go, his anger  would bear him down 
all the roads of the world, pursuing, until he had him at last: Gollum. Then 
Gollum would die in a corner. But that was not what he had set out to do. It 
would  not be  worth while to leave his master for  that. It would not bring 
him back. Nothing would. They had better both be dead together. And that too 
would be a lonely journey. 
     He  looked on  the bright point of the sword. He thought  of the places 
behind where there  was a black brink  and an  empty  fall into nothingness.  
There  was no  escape  that way. That was to do nothing, not even to grieve.  
That was not what he had set  out to do. 'What am  I to  do then? ' he cried 
again,  and now he seemed  plainly to know the hard  answer: see it through. 
Another lonely journey, and the worst. 
     `What? Me, alone, go  to the Crack of Doom and all? ' He quailed still, 
but the resolve grew. `What? Me take  the Ring from him? The Council gave it 
to him.' 
     But the answer came at  once: `And the  Council gave him companions, so 
that  the errand  should not fail.  And you are the last of all the Company. 
The errand must not fail.' 
     `I wish I wasn't the last,' he groaned. `I wish old Gandalf was hare or  
somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind?  I'm sure to go wrong. 
And it's not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.' 
     'But you haven't put yourself forward; you've been  put forward. And as 
for  not  being the right and proper person,  why,  Mr. Frodo wasn't as  you  

####-might say, nor Mr. Bilbo. They didn't choose themselves.' 
     `Ah well, I must make up my  own mind. I  will  make it up. But I'll be 
sure to go wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over. 
     'Let  me see  now:  if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that 
Thing's on him,  well, the Enemy  will  get it. And that's the end of all of 
us, of Lorien, and  Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And there s no time to 
lose,  or it'll  be the end anyway.  The war's begun, and  more than  likely 
things are all going the Enemy's way  already. No  chance to go back with It  
and  get advice or permission.  No, it's sit here till they come and kill me 
over master's body, and gets It: or take It and go.'  He drew a deep breath. 
'Then take It, it is! ' 
     He stooped. Very gently he undid  the clasp at the neck and slipped his 
hand inside Frodo's tunic;  then with his other  hand raising the  head,  he 
kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over  it.  And  then the 
head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came over the still face, and 
by that  more than by all  other tokens Sam was convinced at last that Frodo  
had died and laid aside the Quest. 
     `Good-bye, master,  my dear! ' he  murmured. 'Forgive  your Sam.  He'll 
come back to  this spot when  the job's done  -- if  he manages it. And then 
he'll  not leave  you again. Rest  you quiet  till  I  come; and may no foul 
creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish, 
I would wish to come back and find you again. Good-bye!  ' 
     And then he bent his own  neck and put the chain upon  it, and  at once 
his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of  the Ring, as if a great 
stone  had been strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight became  less, or  
new strength grew in him, he raised his  head, and then with a  great effort 
got to his feet and found that  he could walk and bear his burden. And for a  
moment he lifted up the Phial  and looked down at his master,  and the light  
burned gently  now with the soft radiance of the evening-star in summer, and 
in that light Frodo's face was fair of hue again, pale but beautiful with an 
elvish beauty,  as of one who has  long  passed the  shadows. And  with  the  
bitter comfort of that last sight Sam  turned and hid the light and stumbled 
on into the growing dark. 
     He  had not far to go.  The  tunnel was some way  behind;  the  Cleft a  
couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in  the dusk` a  
deep rut worn in  ages of  passage,  running  now gently up in a long trough 
with cliffs on either side. The trough narrowed rapidly. Soon Sam came  to a  

####-long flight of broad shallow steps. Now the orc-tower  was right  above him, 
frowning black, and in it the red eye  glowed. Now he was hidden in the dark 
shadow under it. He was coming to the top of  the steps and was in the Cleft  
at last. 
     'I've made up  my  mind,' he kept saying to himself.  But  he  had not. 
Though  he  had done his best  to  think it  out,  what  he  was  doing  was 
altogether against the grain  of his nature.  `Have  I  got it  wrong? '  he 
muttered. `What ought I to have done? ' 
     As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached the 
actual summit,  before  he looked  at last on the  path descending into  the 
Nameless Land. he turned. For a moment, motionless  in intolerable doubt, he 
looked back. He could still see, like a small blot in  the gathering  gloom, 
the mouth  of the tunnel; and he thought he could see or  guess where  Frodo  
lay. He fancied there was a glimmer on the ground  down there, or perhaps it 
was some trick of his tears, as he peered out at that high stony place where 
all his life had fallen in ruin. 
     'If only I could have my wish, my one wish,' he sighed, `to go back and 
find him! '  Then  at last he turned to  the  road in front and took  a  few 
steps: the heaviest and the most reluctant he had ever taken. 
     Only a few steps; and now only a  few more and  he would be going  down 
and would never see that high place again. And then suddenly  he heard cries 
and voices. He stood still as  stone.  Orc-voices. They were behind him  and 
before him.  A noise of tramping feet and harsh shouts:  Orcs were coming up 
to  the  Cleft from the  far side, from  some entry to  the tower,  perhaps.  
Tramping feet and shouts behind. He  wheeled round. He saw small red lights, 
torches, winking away below there as they  issued  from the tunnel. At  last  
the hunt was up. The red eye of the tower had not been blind. He was caught. 
     Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was 
very near. In a  minute they would reach the top and be on  him. He had taken 
too long in making up his mind, and now it was no good. How could he escape, 
or save himself, or save the Ring? The Ring. He was not aware of any thought 
or  decision. He simply found himself drawing  out the  chain and taking the 
Ring in his hand.  The head of  the  orc-company appeared in the Cleft right  
before him. Then he put it on. 
     The world changed, and a single moment of time was filled with an  hour  
of thought. At once he was aware that  hearing was sharpened while sight was 
dimmed, but otherwise than in  Shelob's  lair. All things about him now were 

####-not dark but vague; while he himself was there in  a grey hazy world, alone,  
like a small black solid rock and the Ring, weighing down his left hand, was 
like an orb of hot gold. He did not feel invisible at  all, but horribly and 
uniquely visible; and he knew that somewhere an Eye was searching for him. 
     He heard the  crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul 
Vale;  and down away under the rock the bubbling misery  of Shelob, groping, 
lost in some blind passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the 
cries of the Orcs  as they came out of the tunnel; and deafening, roaring in 
his ears, the crash of the feet  a nd the  rending clamour of the Orcs before 
him.  He  shrank  against the cliff. But  they marched  up  like  a  phantom 
company,  grey distorted  figures in a mist, only  dreams of  fear with pale 
flames in their hands. And they passed him  by. He  cowered , trying to creep  
away into some cranny and to hide. 
     He listened.  The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had 
sighted one another,  and  both parties were now hurrying  and  shouting. He 
heard them both clearly, and he understood what they  said. Perhaps the Ring 
gave understanding of tongues,  or simply  understanding, especially  of the  
servants  of  Sauron  its maker, so that if he gave heed,  he understood and 
translated  the thought  to himself. Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in 
power  as it approached the places of its forging; but one  thing it did not 
confer, and that  was courage. At present Sam  still thought only of hiding, 
of lying low till all  was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He  could 
not tell how near the voices were, the words seemed almost in his ears.  
     'Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already? ' 
     'Orders, you lubber. And what are  you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking 
up there? Thinking of coming down to fight? ' 
     'Orders to  you.  I'm in command  of this pass.  So speak civil. What's 
your report?  ' 
     'Nothing.' 
     `Hai!  hai! yoi!'  A yell  broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The 
Orcs lower down  had  suddenly seen something. They began to run. So did the 
others. 
     `Hai! Hola! Here's something! Lying right in  the road. A spy, a spy! ' 
There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.  
     With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from his cowering mood. They 
had 
seen  his master. What would they do? He had heard tales of the Orcs to make 

####-the blood run cold. It could not be borne. He  sprang up. He flung the Quest  
and all his decisions away, and fear and doubt with them.  He knew now where 
his place was  and had been: at  his master's side, though what he  could do 
there  was not clear. Back  he  ran down the  steps, down the  path  towards 
Frodo. 
     `How many are there?'  he  thought. `Thirty or forty  from the tower at 
least, and  a  lot more than  that  from down below, I guess. How many can I 
kill before they get  me? They'll see the flame of  the  sword, as soon as I 
draw it, and they'll get me  sooner or later. I wonder if any song will ever  
mention it: How Samwise  fell  in  the High Pass and made  a wall of  bodies 
round his master. No,  no song. Of course not, for the Ring'll be found, and 
there'll be  no more songs. I can't help it. My place is  by Mr. Frodo. They 
must understand that  --  Elrond  and the Council, and  the  great Lords and 
Ladies with all their wisdom. Their plans  have gone wrong. I can't be their 
Ring-bearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.' 
     But the  Orcs were  out  of his dim sight now. He  had  had no  time to 
consider himself, but now he  realized  that he was  weary, weary almost  to  
exhaustion: his legs would not carry him as he wished. He was  too slow. The 
path seemed miles long. Where had they all got to in the mist?  
     There they were  again!  A good way  ahead still. A cluster of  figures 
round something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be darting this way and 
that, bent like dogs on a trail. He tried to make a spurt. 
     'Come on, Sam!  ' he said, `or you'll be too late  again.' He  loosened 
the sword in its sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then-- 
     There was a wild clamour, hooting and laughing, as something was lifted 
from the ground. 'Ya hoi! Ya harri hoi! Up! Up! ' 
     Then a  voice shouted: `Now off! The quick way. Back to  the Undergate! 
She'll  not  trouble us  tonight  by  all  the signs.'  The  whole  band  of 
orc-figures  began  to move. Four in the middle were carrying a body high on 
their shoulders. `Ya hoi!  ' 
     They had taken Frodo's body. They were off. He could not catch them up. 
Still he laboured on. The Orcs reached the tunnel and were passing in. Those 
with the  burden  went  first, and  behind them  there  was a  good  deal of 
struggling  and  jostling. Sam came on. He drew the sword, a flicker of blue 
in his  wavering hand, but they did not see it. Even as  he came panting up, 
the last of them vanished into the black hole. 
     For a moment he stood, gasping,  clutching his breast. Then he drew his 

####-sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears.  'Curse 
the filth! ' he said, and sprang after them into the darkness.  
     It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was as if 
he  had  stepped out of  a thin mist into  a heavier fog. His  weariness was 
growing but his will  hardened  all the more. He thought  he  could  see the 
light of torches a little way ahead, but try as he would, he could not catch 
them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and this  tunnel  they  knew well.; for in 
spite of Shelob they were forced  to use it  often as the swiftest  way from 
the Dead City over the mountains. In  what far -off time  the main tunnel and 
the great round  pit had been  made, where Shelob had  taken up her abode in 
ages past. they did not  know: but many byways they  had  themselves  delved 
about in on either side, so as to escape the lair in their goings to and fro 
on  the business of their masters.  Tonight they  did not intend to  go  far 
down. but  were  hastening to find  a side-passage  that  led back  to their 
watch-tower on  the cliff. Must of  them were gleeful,  delighted with  what 
they had found and seen, and as they ran they gabbled and yammered after the 
fashion of their kind. Sam heard the  noise  of their harsh voices, flat and 
hard in the dead air, and he could distinguish two voices from among all the 
rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The  captains of the  two parties 
seemed to  be bringing up the rear, debating as they went. 
     'Can't you  stop your rabble  making such a racket, Shagrat? '  grunted 
the one. `We don't want Shelob on us.' 
     `Go on, Gorbag! Yours are  making  more than half the noise,'  said the 
other.  `But let the  lads play! No need to worry about  Shelob for a bit, I 
reckon. She's sat on a nail, it  seems, and we shan't cry about that. Didn't  
you see: a nasty  mess all the way  back to  that cursed crack  of  hers? If 
we've stopped it once, we've stopped it  a  hundred times. So let 'em laugh. 
And we've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that Lugb®rz wants.' 
     'Lugb®rz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? Elvish it looked to me, 
but undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that? ' 
     'Don't know till we've had a look.' 
     'Oho! So they  haven't  told you what to expect? They don't tell us all 
they  know, do  they? Not by  half. But they can make mistakes, even the Top 
Ones can.' 
     `Sh, Gorbag!'  Shagrat's voice  was  lowered, so  tha t  even  with  his 
strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just  catch  what was said. 'They 
may, but they've got eyes and ears everywhere; some among my lot, as like as 

####-not.  But there's no  doubt about it, they're troubled about something.  The 
Nazgyl  down below are, by your account; and Lugb®rz is too. Something 
nearly 
slipped.' 
     `Nearly, you say! ' said Gorbag. 
     `All right,' said Shagrat, `but we'll  talk of that later: Wait till we 
get to the Under -way.  There's a place there where  we can talk a bit, while 
the lads go on.' 
     Shortly  afterwards  Sam saw the  torches  disappear. Then there  was a  
rumbling noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as  he could guess 
the Orcs  had turned and gone into the very opening which Frodo  and  he  had 
tried and found blocked. It was still blocked. 
     There  seemed to be a  great stone  in  the  way,  but the Orcs had got 
through somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other side. They were 
still running  along, deeper and deeper into the mountain,  back towards the 
tower. Sam felt desperate. They were carrying off his master's body for some 
foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and 
he  threw himself against it, but it did not  yield. Then not far inside, or 
so he thought,  he  heard the two captains' voices talking  again.  He stood 
still  listening  for a little  hoping  perhaps  to learn something  useful. 
Perhaps Gorbag, who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul, would come out, and 
he 
could then slip in. 
     `No,  I  don't  know,' said  Gorbag's voice. `The messages  go  through 
quicker  than anything could fly, as a rule. But I  don't  enquire how  it's 
done. Safest not to. Grr! Those Nazgyl give me the creeps. And they skin the 
body off you as soon as  look at you, and leave  you all cold in the  dark on 
the  other side. But He likes 'em;  they're His favourites nowadays, so it's 
no use grumbling. I tell you, it's no game serving down in the city.' 
     `You should try being up here with Shelob for company,' said Shagrat. 
     'I'd like to try somewhere where there's  none of 'em. But the war's on 
now, and when that's over things may be easier.' 
     `It's going well, they say.' 
     'They would.' grunted  Gorbag. `We'll  see. But anyway, if  it does  go 
well,  there should  be  a lot more  room. What d'you  say?   -- if we get  a 
chance, you and me'll slip  off  and set up somewhere on our  own with a few 
trusty lads, somewhere  where there's good  loot nice and handy, and no  big  

####-bosses.' 
     'Ah! ' said Shagrat. `Like old times.' 
     `Yes,' said Gorbag. 'But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As 
I  said, the Big Bosses, ay,' his voice  sank almost to a whisper, `ay, even 
the  Biggest,  can  make mistakes. Something  nearly slipped you say. I say, 
something has slipped. And we've got to  look out. Always the poor  Uruks to 
put slips right, and small thanks. But don't forget: the enemies don't  love 
us  any more than they love Him, and if they get topsides on Him, we're done 
too. But see here: when were you ordered out? ' 
     `About an hour ago,  just  before you  saw us.  A message  came: Nazgyl 
uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to  head of Stairs. 
I came at once.' 
     'Bad business,'  said Gorbag.  `See  here  -- our Silent  Watchers were 
uneasy more than two days ago. that I know. But my patrol wasn't ordered out 
for another  day, nor any message sent to Lugb®rz either: owing to the Great 
Signal going up, and the High Nazgyl going off to the war, and all that. And 
then they couldn't get Lugb®rz to pay attention for a good while, I'm told.' 
     `The Eye  was busy elsewhere,  I  suppose,'  said Shagrat.  `Big things 
going on away west, they say.' 
     'I daresay,' growled Gorbag.  `But in the meantime enemies  have got up 
the Stairs. And what were you up to? You're  supposed to  keep watch, aren't 
you, special orders or no? What are you for?' 
     `That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right.  
We knew there were funny things going on.' 
     `Very funny!  ' 
     `Yes, very funny: lights  and  shouting and all. But Shelob was on  the 
go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.' 
     `Her Sneak? What's that? ' 
     `You  must  have  seen  him:  little thin  black  fellow; like a spider  
himself, or perhaps more lik e a starved frog. He's  been  here  before. Came 
out of Lugb®rz the first time, years  ago,  and  we had word from High Up to 
let  him pass.  He's been up the Stairs once  or twice since then, but we've 
left him  alone: seems  to  have some  understanding with  Her  Ladyship.  I  
suppose he's no good to eat:  she wouldn't  worry about words from High  Up. 
But a  fine guard you keep in the valley:  he  was up here a day  before all 
this racket. Early last  night we  saw him. Anyway my lads reported that Her  
Ladyship was having some fun, and that seemed good  enough for me, until the 

####-message came.  I thought  her  Sneak had  brought her a toy. or  that  you'd 
perhaps  sent  her a present,  a  prisoner  of  war  or  something. I  don't 
interfere  when  she's pla ying.  Nothing gets by  Shelob  when  she's on the 
hunt.' 
     'Nothing, say you! Didn't you use your eyes back there? I tell you  I'm 
not easy in my mind. Whatever came up the Stairs, did  get by. It cut her web  
and got clean out of the hole. That's something to think about! ' 
     `Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn't she? ' 
     `Got him? Got who? This little fellow? But if  he was the only one then 
she'd have had him off to her larder long before, and there he'd be now. And 
if Lugb®rz wanted him, you'd  have to go and get him. Nice for you. But there 
was more than one.' 
     At this point Sam began to listen  more attentively and pressed his ear 
against the stone. 
     'Who cut the cords she'd  put round  him, Shagrat? Same one  as cut the 
web. Didn't you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyship? Same one, I 
reckon. And where is he? Where is he, Shagrat? ' 
     Shagrat made no reply. 
     `You may  well put  your  thinking cap on,  if you've  got one. It's no 
laughing matter. No  one, no one  has ever stuck a  pin in Shelob before, as 
you  should  know well enough.  There's no  grief in that; but think -there's 
someone  loose hereabouts  as is more dangerous than any other  damned rebel 
that ever  walked since the bad old times, since the  Great Siege. Something  
has slipped.' 
     `And what is it then? ' growled Shagrat. 
     `By all the  signs, Captain  Shagrat, I'd say there's  a  large warrior  
loose,  Elf most likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an axe as well maybe: 
and he's loose in your bounds, too, and you've never spotted him. Very funny 
indeed! ' Gorbag spat. Sam smiled grimly at this description of himself.  
     'Ah well, you always did take a gloomy  view.'  said  Shagrat. 'You can 
read the signs how you like, but there  may be  other   ways to explain them. 
Anyhow. I've  got watchers  at every point, and  I'm  going to deal with one 
thing at a  time. When  I've had  a look at the fellow we have caught,  then 
I'll begin to worry  
 
1cb2 
 

####-about something else.' 
     `It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,' said Gorbag. 
'He may have had nothing to  do  with the real mischief. The big fellow with 
the sharp sword doesn't seem to have thought him  worth much  anyhow  -- just  
left him lying: regular elvish trick.' 
     `We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go  and have a look 
at the prisoner! 
     `What  are  you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first. 
If there's any game, me and my lads must be in it.' 
     'Now, now,' growled  Shagrat. 'I  have my  orders. And it's more than my 
belly's worth, or yours, to break 'em. Any trespasser found by the  guard is 
to  be held at the  tower. Prisoner is  to be stripped. Full description  of 
every  article, garment, weapon,  letter,  ring. or trinket is to be sent to 
Lugb®rz at once, and to  Lugb®rz only . And  the prisoner is to be  kept safe  
and intact,  under pain  of death for every member  of  the guard, until  He 
sends or comes Himself. That's plain enough,  and that's what I'm  going  to 
do.' 
     'Stripped, eh? ' said Gorbag. 'What, teeth, nails, hair, and all? ' 
     `No,  none of that. He's for Lugb®rz,  I tell you. He's wanted safe and 
whole.' 
     'You'll find that difficult,' laughed Gorbag. 'He's nothing but carrion 
now. What Lugb®rz will do with such  stuff I can't guess. He might as well go 
in the pot.' 
     'You  fool,'  snarled Shagrat.  'You've been talking very  clever,  but 
there's a lot you don't  know, though most other folk do. You'll be  for the 
pot or for Shelob, if you don't take  care. Carrion! Is that all you know of 
Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords,  she's after meat. She  doesn't eat 
dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow isn't dead! ' 
     Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if  the whole dark world 
was turning upside  down. So great was the shock that he almost swooned, but 
even as he fought to keep a hold on his senses, deep inside him he was aware 
of the  comment: 'You  fool, he  isn't dead, and your heart  knew  it. Don't  
trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part  of you. The  trouble with 
you is that you never really had any hope. Now what is to be done? ' Fur the  
moment nothing, but to prop himself against the  unmoving  stone and listen, 
listen to the vile orc-voices. 
     `Garn!'  said  Shagrat. 'She's got more than  one  poison.  When  she's 

####-hunting, she just gives 'em a dab in the neck and  they go as limp as  boned 
fish, and then she has her way with them. D'you remember old Ufthak? We lost  
him for days.  Then we found him in a corner;  hanging up he was, but he was 
wide awake  and glaring. How we laughed! She'd  forgotten him, maybe, but 
we 
didn't  touch him-no  good interfering with Her. Nar  -- this  little filth, 
he'll wake up, in  a few hours; and  beyond feeling a  bit sick for  a  hit, 
he'll be  all right. Or would  be,  if Lugb®rz  would let him alone. And  of 
course, beyond wondering where he is and what's happened to him.' 
     'And what's going to happen to him,' laughed Gorbag. 'We can tell him a  
few stories at  any rate, if we can't do a nything else. I don't suppose he's 
ever been in lovely Lugb®rz, so he may  like to know what to expect. This is 
going to be more funny than I thought. Let's go!' 
     `There's going to be no fun, I tell  you,' said Shagrat.  'And he's got 
to be kept safe, or we're all as good as dead.' 
     `AII  right! But if I  were you, I'd catch the  big one  that's  loose, 
before you send in any report to Lugb®rz. It  won't sound too pretty  to say 
you've caught the kitten and let the cat escape.' 
     The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet receding. He 
was recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury was on him. `I got it all  
wrong!  ' he cried. `I knew I  would. Now they've  got him, the  devils! the 
filth! Never leave your master, never,  never: that was my right rule. And I 
knew  it in my heart. May  I be forgiven!  Now I've got to get  back to him. 
Somehow, somehow!  ' 
     He  drew his sword again and  beat on the stone with the  hilt, but  it 
only gave out a dull sound. The sword, however, bla zed so brightly now  that 
he could see dimly  in its light. To his surprise he noticed  that the great 
block was shaped like a heavy door, and  was less than twice his own height. 
Above it was a  dark blank  space between the top and the  low  arch of  the 
opening.  It was probably only meant to be a stop against the  intrusion  of 
Shelob, fastened on the inside with some latch or bolt  beyond the reach  of 
her cunning. With  his  remaining  strength  Sam leaped and caught the  top,  
scrambled up, and dropped;  and  then he ran  madly, sword blazing in  hand, 
round a bend and up a winding tunnel. 
     The news  that his master was still alive roused him  to a  last effort 
beyond thought  of weariness. He could not see anything  ahead. for this new 
passage twisted and turned constantly; but  he thought  he was  catching the  

####-two Orcs up: their  voices were growing  nearer again. Now they seemed quite 
close. 
     `That's what I'm going  to do,'  said Shagrat in angry tones.  'Put him 
right up in the top chamber.' 
     `What for? ' growled Gorbag. `Haven't you any lock -ups down below? ' 
     `He's  going out of harm's way,  I  tell  you,' answered Shagrat. 'See?  
He's  precious.  I  don't trust  all  my lads,  and  none of yours;  nor you  
neither, when you're mad for fun. He's going where I want him, and where you  
won't come,  if you  don't keep civil. Up to the top,  I  say. He'll be safe 
there.' 
     `Will  he?'  said Sam. 'You're  forgetting the great big elvish warrior  
that's loose!' And with that he raced  round   the last corner, only to  find 
that by some trick of the tunnel, or of the hearing which the Ring gave him, 
he had misjudged the distance. 
     The two orc-figures were still some way ahead. He could  see  them now,  
black and squat against a red glare. The passage ran straight at last, up an 
incline;  and  at  the  end, wide open,  were  great  double doors,  leading 
probably to deep  chambers far below the high horn of the tower. Already the 
Orcs  with their burden  had  passed inside. Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing 
near the gate. 
     Sam  heard a burst  of hoarse singing, blaring of horns  and banging of 
gongs, a hideous clamour. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on the threshold. 
     Sam yelled  and brandished Sting, but his little  voice was  drowned in 
the tumult. No one heeded him. 
     The  great  doors slammed to. Boom.  The bars  of iron fell  into place 
inside. Clang.  The gate was  shut.  Sam  hurled  himself against the bolted 
brazen plates and fell senseless to the ground. He  was out in the darkness. 
Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy. 
  

####- 
    Here ends the second part of the history of the War of the Ring. 
 
     The third  part tells of  the  last defence against the Shadow, and the 
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in  THE RETURN OF THE KING . 
 
 
 
 

####-####- 

 
 

 * BOOK V *  

Chapter 1. Minas Tirith 

 
 
     Pippin  looked out from  the shelter of Gandalf's cloak. He wondered if 
he was awake or still sleeping, still in the  swift-moving dream in which he 
had  been  wrapped so long since the  great  ride  began. The dark world was 
rushing by and  the wind sang loudly in his ears. He could  see nothing  but 
the wheeling stars, and away to his right vast shadows against the sky where 
the mountains of the  South  marched past.  Sleepily he tried  to reckon the 
times and stages of their journey, but his memory was drowsy and uncertain. 
     There  had been the first  ride at terrible speed without  a  halt, and 
then in the dawn he had  seen a pale gleam of gold, and they had come to the 
silent  town  and the great empty house on  the  hill.  And  hardly had they 
reached its shelter when the winged shadow  had passed  over once again, and 
men wilted with fear. But Gandalf had spoken  soft words to him,  and he had 
slept in a corner, tired but uneasy, dimly aware of  comings  and goings and  
of men talking and Gandalf giving orders. And then  again riding, riding  in 
the  night. This was the second, no, the third night since  he had looked in 
the Stone. And with that hideous memory he woke fully, and shivered, and the 
noise of the wind became filled with menacing voices.  
     A light kindled in the sky, a blaze of yellow fire behind dark barriers 
Pippin  cowered back, afraid for  a  moment,  wondering  into what  dreadful 
country Gandalf was bearing him. He rubbed his eyes, and then he saw that it 
was the moon rising above the eastern shadows, now  almost at  the full.  So 
the night was not  yet  old and  for hours the dark journey  would go on. He 
stirred and spoke. 
     'Where are we, Gandalf?' he asked. 
     'In the realm of Gondor,' the wizard answered. 'The land  of Anurien is 
still passing by.' 
     There was a silence again  for a  while. Then,  'What  is that?'  cried 
Pippin  suddenly,  clutching at Gandalf's cloak.  'Look! Fire, red fire! Are 
there dragons in this land?  Look, there is another!' 
     For  answer  Gandalf  cried aloud to his horse. 'On, Shadowfax! We must  

####-hasten. Time is  short.  See! The beacons of Gondor are  alight, calling for  
aid. War  is  kindled.  See,  there is the  fire  on Amon  Don, and flame on 
Eilenach;  and  there they go speeding  west:  Nardol,  Erelas,  Min-Rimmon, 
Calenhad, and the Halifirien on the borders of Rohan.' 
     But Shadowfax  paused in  his stride, slowing  to  a  walk, and then he 
lifted up his head and neighed. And out of the  darkness the answering neigh  
of other  horses came; and  presently the  thudding of hoofs was heard,  and 
three riders swept up and passed like flying ghosts in the moon and vanished  
into the West. Then Shadowfax gathered himself together and sprang away, 
and 
the night flowed over him like a roaring wind. 
     Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling 
him of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built 
on the tops  of  outlying hills along both border s  of the great  range, and 
maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness 
to bear  his errand-riders to  Rohan in the North,  or  to Belfalas  in  the 
South. 'It is long since the beacons of the North  were lit,' he said;  'and 
in the ancient days of  Gondor they were not needed, for  they had the Seven  
Stones.' Pippin stirred uneasily. 
     'Sleep  again, and do  not be  afraid!' said Gandalf. 'For you are  not 
going like Frodo to  Mordor, but  to Minas Tirith, and there you  will be as 
safe as you can  be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or  the Ring is 
taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.' 
     'You do not comfort me,' said Pippin, but nonetheless  sleep crept over  
him. The last  thing that he remembered before he fell into deep dream was a 
glimpse of high white peaks, glimmering like floating isles above the clouds 
as they caught the light of the westering moon. He wondered where Frodo was,  
and if he was already in Mordor, or if he was dead; and he did not know that 
Frodo from far away looked on that same moon as it set beyond Gondor ere the 
coming of the day. 
     Pippin woke  to  the sound of voices. Another day of hiding and a night 
of journey had fleeted by. It was twilight: the cold dawn was at hand again, 
and chill grey mists were about them.  Shadowfax stood  steaming with sweat, 
but he held his neck proudly and showed  no sign of weariness. Many tall men 
heavily cloaked  stood beside him, and behind them in the mist loomed a wall 
of stone. Partly ruinous  it seemed, but already before the night was passed 
the sound  of  hurried labour  could  be heard:  beat  of hammers,  clink of 

####-trowels,  and the creak of wheels. Torches and flares glowed dully here  and 
there in the fog. Gandalf was speaking  to the men that  barred his way, and 
as he listened Pippin became aware that he himself was being discussed. 
     'Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,' said the leader  of the men, 'and 
you know the pass-words of the  Seven  Gates and are free to go forward. But 
we do not know your companion. What  is he?  A dwarf out of the mountains 
in 
the North? We wish for no strangers in the land at this time, unless they be 
mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust.' 
     'I will vouch  for him before the seat of Denethor,' said Gandalf. 'And 
as  for valour,  that  cannot be computed by stature. He has  passed through 
more  battles and  perils than you have,  Ingold, though  you  be twice  his 
height; and  he comes  now  from the storming of Isengard,  of which we bear 
tidings,  and great weariness is  on him, or  I would wake him. His name  is 
Peregrin, a very valiant man.' 
     'Man?' said Ingold dubiously; and the others laughed. 
     'Man!' cried Pippin,  now  thoroughly roused.  'Man! Indeed not! I am a  
hobbit and no more valiant  than I am a man,  save perhaps  now and again by 
necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!' 
     'Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,' said Ingold.  'But what 
is a hobbit?' 
     'A Halfling,' answered Gandalf. 'Nay,  not the one that was spoken of,' 
he added seeing  the  wonder  in the  men's  faces. 'Not  he, yet one of his 
kindred.' 
     'Yes, and one  who  journeyed  with him,' said Pippin. 'And  Boromir of 
your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the  
last he was slain defending me from many foes.' 
     'Peace!'  said Gandalf.  'The news of that grief should have  been told 
first to the father.' 
     'It  has  been  guessed  already,' said  Ingold;  'for there have  been 
strange portents here  of late. But pass  on now  quickly! For  the  Lord of 
Minas Tirith  will be eager to see any that bear the  latest tidings of  his 
son, be he man or --' 
     'Hobbit,' said Pippin.  'Little  service  can I offer to your lord, but 
what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.' 
     'Fare you well!' said  Ingold; and the men made way for Shadow fax, and 
he  passed through a narrow gate in the wall. 'May you bring good counsel to 

####-Denethor  in his need, and  to us all, Mithrandir!' Ingold  cried.  'But you  
come with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.' 
     'Because I come seldom but  when my help  is needed,' answered Gandalf.  
'And as for counsel, to you I would  say that you are over -late in repairing 
the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will  now be your best defence against the 
storm that is at  hand - that and such  hope as  I  bring. For not  all  the 
tidings that I  bring are  evil.  But leave your  trowels  and  sharpen your 
swords!' 
     'The work will be finished ere evening, ' said Ingold. 'This is the last  
portion of  the wall  to be put in defence: the least open to attack, for it 
looks  towards our  friends of Rohan.  Do  you know aught of them? Will they 
answer the summons, think you?' 
     'Yes,  they will come. But  they have fought many battles at your back. 
This road and no road looks towards safety  any longer. Be vigilant! But for  
Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host  of foes coming  out of 
Anurien 
and no Riders of Rohan. And you may yet. Fare you well, and sl eep not!' 
     Gandalf passed now into  the wide land  beyond the Rammas Echor. So the 
men of Gondor  called the out  wall that they had  built with great  labour, 
after Ithilien fell under the shadow of their Enemy. For ten leagues or more 
it ran from the  mountains' feet  and so back again, enclosing in its  fence 
the fields of the Pelennor:  fair and fertile townlands  on  the long slopes 
and terraces falling to the deep levels of the Anduin. At its furthest point 
from the  Great Gate of the City, north-eastward, the wall  was four leagues 
distant, and there from a frowning bank  it overlooked the long flats beside 
the river,  and men had  made it high and strong; for at  that point, upon a  
walled causeway, the  road came in from  the fords and bridges  of Osgiliath 
and passed  through a guarded gate between embattled towers. At its  nearest 
point the  wall was little more than one league from the  City, and that was 
south-eastward. There Anduin, going in a  wide knee about the  hills of Emyn 
Arnen in South Ithilien, bent sharply west, and  the out-wall rose  upon its 
very  brink; and beneath  it lay  the quays and  landings of the Harlond for  
craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs.  
     The  townlands  were rich,  with  wide  tilth  and many  orchards,  and 
homesteads there  were with oast  and garner, fold and byre, and  many rills 
rippling through  the  green from the  highlands  down  to Anduin.  Yet  the 

####-herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many, and the most part 
of 
the people of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the  City, or in the high 
vales of  the  mountain-borders,  in Lossarnach,  or  further south  in fair 
Lebennin with its five swift streams. There dwelt  a  hardy folk between the 
mountains and the sea. They were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood 
was 
mingled, and there were short  and swarthy  folk among them whose sires came 
more from the forgotten men who  housed in  the  shadow  of the hills in the 
Dark  Years  ere the coming of the kings. But  beyond,  in the great fief of 
Belfalas, dwelt Prince Imrahil  in  his castle of Dol Amroth by the sea, and 
he was of high blood,  and  his folk also, tall  men and proud with sea -grey 
eyes. 
     Now after Gandalf had ridden for some time the light of day grew in the 
sky, and Pippin roused himself and looked up. To his left lay a sea of mist, 
rising  to a  bleak  shadow  in the  East;  but to his right great mountains 
reared their heads, ranging  from the West  to a steep and sudden end, as if 
in  the  making of the land the  River  had burst  through a great  barrier, 
carving  out a mighty valley to be a  land  of battle and debate in times to 
come. And there where the White Mountains of Ered Nimrais  came to their 
end 
he saw, as Gandalf had promised, the dark mass of Mount  Mindolluin, the deep 
purple  shadows of its high glens, and its tall face whitening in the rising 
day. And upon its out-thrust knee was the Guarded City, with its seven walls 
of stone  so  strong and  old that  it seemed to have been  not builded  but 
carven by giants out of the bones of the earth. 
     Even  as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls  passed from  looming grey to 
white, blushing faintly in  the dawn;  and suddenly the sun climbed over the 
eastern shadow and sent forth a shaft that  smote the face of the City. Then 
Pippin cried aloud, for the Tower  of  Ecthelion, standing high  within  the 
topmost walls' shone  out against the  sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl 
and silver, tall and fair and shapely, and its pinnacle  glittered as if  it 
were wrought of crystals;  and white  banners  broke and  fluttered from the 
battlements in the morning breeze' and high and far he heard a clear ringing 
as of silver trumpets. 
     So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate  of the Men of Gondor at 
the rising of the sun, and its iron doors rolled back before them. 

####-     'Mithrandir!  Mithrandir!' men  cried. 'Now we know that  the  storm is 
indeed nigh!' 
     'It is upon you,' said  Gandalf. 'I  have  ridden  on its wings. Let me 
pass!  I  must come  to  your  Lord Denethor, while his  stewardship  lasts.  
Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have 
known. 
Let me pass!' 
     Then men  fell back before the command of his voice  and questioned him 
no further, though  they gazed in wonder  at the hobbit that sat before  him 
and at the horse that bore him. For the people of  the City used horses very 
little and they were seldom seen in their streets, save only those ridden by  
the errand-riders of their  lord. And they said: 'Surely that is one  of the 
great steeds of the  King  of  Rohan?  Maybe  the Rohirrim will come soon to 
strengthen us.' But Shadowfax walked proudly up the long winding road. 
     For the  fashion  of  Minas Tirith was such that it was built on  seven 
levels,  each  delved into the hill, and about each  was set a  wall, and in 
each wall was a  gate. But the gates were not set in a line:  the Great Gate 
in the City Wall was at  the  east  point of the circuit, but the next faced 
half south, and the third half north, and so to and fro upwards; so that the 
paved  way that climbed towards  the Citadel turned  first this way and then 
that across the face of  the hill. And each  time that it passed the line of 
the  Great Gate it went through an  arched  tunnel, piercing a  vast pier of 
rock whose  huge out-thrust bulk  divided in two all the circles of the City 
save the first. For partly in  the  primeval shaping  of the hill, partly by 
the mighty craft and labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the wide 
court behind the  Gate a  towering  bastion  of stone, its edge sharp  as  a  
ship-keel facing east. Up it rose, even to the level of the  topmost circle, 
and there was crowned  by  a battlement; so that those in the Citadel might, 
like mariners in a mountainous ship, look  from  its peak sheer down upon the 
Gate  seven  hundred  feet  below.  The entrance  to the Citadel also looked 
eastward,  but  was delved in the  heart of the rock; thence a long lamp-lit 
slope ran up to the seventh gate. Thus  men reached  at last the High Court, 
and the Place of the  Fountain before the feet of the  White Tower: tall and 
shapely,  fifty fathoms from its  base to the pinnacle, where the banner  of 
the Stewards floated a thousand feet above the plain. 
     A  strong citadel  it was indeed,  and  not to be taken  by  a  host of 
enemies, if  there were any within that could hold weapons;  unless some foe 

####-could come behind and scale the lower skirts of Mindolluin, and so come upon 
the narrow shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard to the mountain  mass. But 
that shoulder, which rose to  the height of the fifth wall, was hedged  with 
great ramparts right up to the precipice that overhung its western end;  and 
in that  space stood the houses and  domed tombs of bygone kings  and lords, 
for ever silent between the mountain and the tower. 
     Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone city, vaster and more 
splendid  than  anything that he had dreamed of;  greater and  stronger than 
Isengard, and far more beautiful.  Yet it was in truth falling year by  year 
into decay; and already it lacked half the men that could have dwelt at ease 
there. In  every street they passed  some  great house or  court  over whose 
doors and arched gates were carved many fair letters  of strange and ancient  
shapes: names Pippin  guessed of great men and kindreds that had once  dwelt 
there;  and  yet now they were silent,  and no footsteps rang  on their wide 
pavements, nor voice was heard in their halls, nor any face looked out  from 
door or empty window.  
     At last they came out of  shadow to the seventh gate,  and the warm sun 
that shone down beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades of Ithilien, 
glowed here on the smooth walls and rooted pillars, and the great arch  with  
keystone  carven  in  the  likeness of a crowned and  kingly  head.  Gandalf 
dismounted, for no horse was allowed in the Citadel,  and Shadowfax suffered 
himself to be led away at the soft word of his master. 
     The Guards of the gate  were robed  in black, and  their helms  were of 
strange  shape, high-crowned,  with long cheek -guards  close-fitting to  the 
face,  and above the cheek -guards were set the white wings of sea -birds; but 
the helms gleamed with a  flame of silver, for they were indeed  wrought  of 
mithril, heirlooms from the glory of old days. Upon  the black surcoats were 
embroidered in white a tree blossoming like  snow beneath a silver crown and 
many-pointed  stars. This  was the livery of the heirs of  Elendil, and none 
wore it now in all Gondor,  save the Guards of the Citadel  before the Court 
of the Fountain where the White Tree once had grown. 
     Already it  seemed that word of their coming had  gone before them: and 
at once they were admitted,  silently, and without question. Quickly Gandalf 
strode across  the white-paved court.  A  sweet fountain played there in the 
morning sun,  and a  sward of bright green  lay about it; but in the  midst. 
drooping over the pool,  stood  a dead  tree, and  the falling drops dripped 
sadly from its barren and broken branches back into the clear water. 

####-     Pippin glanced at  it  as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful, 
he thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was  left in  this place where 
everything else was well tended. 
     Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree. 
     The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into  his mind. And  then 
he found himself at the doors of  the great hall beneath the gleaming tower; 
and behind the wizard he passed the tall silent door -wardens and entered the 
cool echoing shadows of the house of stone. 
     They walked  down  a paved passage, long and  empty, and  as  they went 
Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin. 'Be careful of your  words, Master Peregrin!  
This is  no time for  hobbit pertness. Thjoden is a kindly old man. Denethor  
is of another  sort, proud and subtle,  a  man  of far  greater  lineage and 
power, though  he is  not called a king. But he will  speak most to you, and 
question you much, since you  can tell him  of his son Boromir. He loved him 
greatly: too much  perhaps; and the more  so because they  were  unlike. But 
under cover  of  this love he will think it easier to  learn what he witches 
from you rather than  from me. Do not tell him more than you need, and leave 
quiet  the matter of Frodo's errand. I will deal with that in due  time. And 
say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.' 
     'Why  not? What is wrong with Strider?' Pippin  whispered. 'He meant to 
come here, didn't he? And he'll be arriving soon himself anyway.' 
     'Maybe,  maybe,' said Gandalf. 'Though if he comes, it is likely  to be 
in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be better so. At 
least he should come unheralded by us.' 
     Gandalf halted  before a  tall  door of  polished  metal. 'See,  Master  
Pippin,  there  is no  t ime to instruct  you now in  the history of  Gondor; 
though it might have been  better, if you  had learned something of it, when 
you were  still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods  of the Shire. 
Do as I bid! It  is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his 
heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the  coming of one who  will, if 
he comes, claim the kingship. Is that enough?' 
     'Kingship?' said Pippin amazed. 
     'Yes,' said  Gandalf.  'If you  have  walked all these days with closed 
ears and mind asleep, wake up now!' He knocked on the door. 
     The door opened,  but no one could be  seen  to open it.  Pippin looked 
into a great hall. It was  lit by deep windows in the wide aisles at  either  
side, beyond  the rows of tall  pillars that upheld the  roof. Monoliths  of 

####-black marble, they  rose to great capitals carved in many strange figures of 
beasts and leaves; and far above in  shadow  the wide  vaulting gleamed with 
dull  gold, inset with  flowing traceries of  many colours. No  hangings nor  
storied webs, nor  any things of woven stuff or  of wood, were to be seen in 
that long solemn hall; but between the pillars there stood  a silent company 
of tall images graven in cold stone. 
     Suddenly Pippin was  reminded  of  the hewn rocks of  Argonath, and awe 
fell on him, as he looked down  that  avenue of kings  long dead. At the far 
end upon a dais of many steps was set a high throne under a canopy of marble 
shaped like a crowned helm; behind  it was carved upon the wall and set with 
gems an image of a tree  in flower. But the throne was empty. At the foot of 
the dais, upon the lowest step which was broad and deep, there  was  a stone 
chair,  black and unadorned, and on it sat an  old man gazing at his lap. In 
his hand was a  white rod  with a  golden knob. He did not look up. Solemnly 
they paced the long floor towards him, until they stood three paces from his 
footstool. Then Gandalf spoke. 
     'Hail, Lord  and Steward of Minas Tirith,  Denethor son of Ecthelion! I 
am come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour.' 
     Then  the old  man looked up. Pippin saw his carven face with its proud 
bones  and skin like ivory, and the long  curved nose between  the dark deep 
eyes; and he was reminded not so much of Boromir as of Aragor n.  'Dark 
indeed 
is the hour,' said  the old  man, 'and  at such times you are  wont to come, 
Mithrandir.  But though all  the  signs forebode that the  doom of Gondor is 
drawing  nigh, less now to me is  that darkness than my own darkness. It has 
been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?' 
     'It is,' said Gandalf. 'One  of the twain. The other is with Thjoden of 
Rohan and may come hereafter.  Halflings  they are,  as you see, yet this is 
not he of whom the omens spoke.' 
     'Yet  a  Halfling still,' said Denethor  grimly, 'and little love do  I 
bear the name, since those  accursed words  came to trouble our counsels and 
drew away my son on the  wild errand to his  death. My Boromir!  Now we 
have 
need of you. Faramir should have gone in his stead.' 
     'He would  have  gone,' said  Gandalf.  'Be not unjust  in your  grief!  
Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have it. He was 
a masterful man, and one  to take what he desired. I journeyed far  with him 

####-and learned much of  his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news 
of that ere we came?' 
     'I  have received  this,'  said Denethor, and laying  down his  rod  he 
lifted from his lap the  thing that  he had been gazing at.  In each hand he 
held up one half  of a great  horn cloven through the middle: a wild-ox horn 
bound with silver. 
     'That is the horn that Boromir always wore!' cried Pippin. 
     'Verily,'  said  Denethor. 'And in  my turn  I bore it, and so did each 
eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the failing 
of the kings, since  Vorondil father  of Mardil hunted the wild kine of Araw 
in the  far fields of Rhyn. I heard it blowing dim upon the northern marches 
thirteen  days ago, and the River brought  it to me, broken: it will wind no 
more.' He paused and there was a heavy silence. Suddenly he turned his black 
glance upon Pippin. 'What say you to that, Halfling?' 
     'Thirteen, thirteen days,' faltered Pippin. 'Yes, I think that would be 
so. Yes, I stood beside him,  as he blew the  horn. But  no help  came. Only 
more orcs.' 
     'So,' said  Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin's face. 'You were there?  
Tell me more! Why did no help  come? And how  did you escape, and yet he 
did 
not, so mighty a man as he wa s, and only orcs to withstand him?' 
     Pippin flushed and forgot his fear. 'The mightiest man may be slain  by 
one arrow,'  he said; 'and Boromir was pierced by  many. When last I saw him 
he sank  beside  a tree and plucked a black -feathered shaft  from  his side. 
Then I swooned  and was made  captive. I saw him no more, and know  no 
more. 
But I honour his memory,  for he was very  valiant.  He died to save  us, my 
kinsman Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by  the  soldiery  of  the 
Dark Lord; and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.' 
     Then Pippin looked the old man in  the eye, for pride stirred strangely 
within  him, still stung  by  the scorn  and suspicion in that  cold  voice. 
'Little service, no  doubt, will so great a lord of Men  think to  find in a  
hobbit, a halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I  will offer  
it,  in payment  of my  debt.'  Twitching  aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew 
forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor's feet. 
     A pale smile, like a gleam of  cold sun  on a winter's evening,  passed 
over the old man's face; but he  bent his head and held out his hand, laying 

####-the shards of the horn aside. 'Give me the weapon!' he said. 
     Pippin lifted it  and presented the hilt  to him.   'Whence  came this?' 
said Denethor.  'Many, many years lie on it.  Surely this is a blade wrought 
by our own kindred in the North in the deep past?' 
     'It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country ' said 
Pippin.  'But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willingly tell  
more of them.' 
     'I see that strange tales  are woven about you,'  said  Denethor,  'and 
once again it  is shown  that looks may belie the man  -  or the  halfling. I 
accept  your  service.  For you  are not  daunted  by  words;  and you  have 
courteous  speech, strange though the sound of it may be to us in the South. 
And we shall have  need of all folk of courtesy, be they great  or small, in 
the days to come. Swear to me now!' 
     'Take the hilt,' said Gandalf,  'and speak after the Lord, if  you  are 
resolved on this.' 
     'I am,' said Pippin. 
     The  old man laid  the  sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand to 
the hilt, and said slowly after Denethor: 
     'Here do I swear  fealty and  service  to  Gondor, and  to the Lord and 
Steward of the realm, to  speak and to be silent,  to do and  to let be,  to 
come and to go, in need or plenty, in peace or war, in living or dying, from 
this hour  henceforth, until my  lord  release me, or death take me , or  the 
world end. So say I, Peregrin son of Paladin of the Shire of the Halflings.' 
     And this do I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord  of Gondor, Steward 
of the High King, and I will not forget it, nor fail to reward that which is 
given: fealty with love, valour with honour, oath - breaking with vengeance.' 
Then Pippin received back his sword and put it in its sheath. 
     'And now,' said  Denethor, 'my first command  to you: speak and be  not 
silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that  you can of 
Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!' As he  spoke  he  struck a small silver  
gong  that  stood  near his footstool,  and at  once  servants came forward. 
Pippin saw then that they had been standing in alcoves on either side of the 
door, unseen as he and Gandalf entered. 
     'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,' said Denethor, 'and see 
that none trouble us for one hour.' 
     'It is all that  I have to spare,  for there is  much else to heed,' he 
said  to Gandalf.  'Much of more import,  it  may seem,  and yet to  me less 

####-pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.' 
     'And earlier, it is to  be hoped,' said Gandalf. 'For I have not ridden 
hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind,  
only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous.  Is it naught to you  
that Thjoden has fought a great battle and  that Isengard is overthrown, and 
that I have broken the staff of Saruman?' 
     'It is much to me. But I know already  sufficient of these deeds for my 
own  counsel  against  the menace of the East.' He turned his  dark  eyes on 
Gandalf, and now  Pippin  saw a likeness between  the  two, and he  felt the 
strain between them,  almost as if  he saw a line of smouldering fire, drawn 
from eye to eye, that might suddenly burst into flame. 
     Denethor  looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did, 
more kingly,  beautiful, and powerful; and older. Yet  by a sense other than 
sight  Pippin perceived that  Gandalf had  the greater power and the  deeper 
wisdom, and a majesty that  was veiled.  And he was  older, far older.  'How 
much older?' he wondered, and  then  he thought  how odd it was that he  had 
never thought about it before. Treebeard had  said  something about wizards, 
but even  then  he  had  not  thought of Gandalf as  one  of them. What  was 
Gandalf? In what  far  time and place did he come  into  the world, and when 
would he leave it? And  then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor  
and Gandalf  still looked each other in the eye, as if  reading the  other's 
mind. But it was Denethor who first withdrew his gaze. 
     'Yea,' he  said; 'for though  the Stones  be lost, they say,  still the 
lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many messages come 
to 
them. But sit now!' 
     Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver  
with  a  silver flagon  and cups,  and  white cakes. Pippin sat down, but he 
could  not  take his eyes  from  the  old lord.  Was it so, or  had  he only 
imagined it, that  as he spoke of the Stones a sudden gleam  of his  eye had 
glanced upon Pippin's face?  
     'Now tell  me your tale,  my  liege,' said Denethor, half  kindly; half 
mockingly. 'For the words  of one whom my son so befriended will be  
welcome 
indeed.' 
     Pippin never forgot that hour in the great  hall under the piercing eye 
of the Lord of  Gondor,  stabbed ever and anon by his  shrewd questions, and 

####-all the while conscious of  Gandalf at his side, watching and listening, and 
(so Pippin felt) holding  in check a rising  wrath and impatience.  When the 
hour was  over and Denethor again rang  the gong, Pippin felt worn out.  'It 
cannot  be  more  than  nine o'clock,'  he thought.  'I  could now eat three 
breakfasts on end.' 
     'Lead  the  Lord  Mithrandir  to  the housing prepared for  him,'  said 
Denethor, 'and his companion may lodge with him for the present, if he will.  
But  be it known that  I have  now sworn him to  my service, and he shall be 
known as Peregrin son of Paladin and taught the lesser pass-words. Send word 
to the Captains that they shall wait on me here, as soon as may be after the 
third hour has rung. 
     'And  you,  my Lord  Mithrandir, shall come too, as and when  you will. 
None shall hinder your coming to me at any time, save only in my brief hours 
of sleep. Let your wrath at an old man's folly run off and then return to my 
comfort!' 
     'Folly?'  said  Gandalf. 'Nay,  my lord, when you are a dotard you will 
die. You can  use  even your grief as  a cloak.  Do you  think that I do not 
understand your purpose in  questioning for an hour one who knows the least, 
while I sit by?' 
     'If you understand  it,  then  be  content,' returned  Denethor. 'Pride 
would  be  folly that disdained help and counsel  at need; but you deal  out 
such gifts according to your own designs. Yet  the Lord of Gondor  is not to  
be made the tool  of other men's purposes, however worthy. And to  him there 
is no purpose higher  in the world as it now stands than the good of Gondor;  
and the rule  of Gondor, my lord, is mine and no other man's, unless the king  
should come again.' 
     'Unless  the  king  should  come  again?' said Gandalf. 'Well,  my lord 
Steward,  it is  your task  to keep some  kingdom still against  that event, 
which few now look to see. In that task you shall have all  the aid that you  
are pleased to ask for.  But  I will say this: the rule of no realm is mine, 
neither of Gondor nor any other, great or small.  But all worthy things that 
are in peril as the world now stands,  those are my care. And for my part, I 
shall  not wholly  fail of my task, though Gondor should perish, if anything 
passes through this night that  can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower  
again in days to come. For I also am a steward.  Did you not know?' And with 
that he turned and strode from the hall with Pippin running at his side. 
     Gandalf  did not  look  at Pippin or  speak a word to him as they went. 

####-Their  guide brought them from  the doors  of  the hall, and  then  led them 
across  the  Court  of the  Fountain into a lane  between  tall buildings of 
stone. After  several turns  they came to a house close to the wall  of  the 
citadel upon the north side, not far from the shoulder that linked the  hill 
with  the mountain. Within, upon the first floor above the street, up a wide 
carven  stair,  he showed  them to a fair room, light  and airy, with goodly  
hangings of dull gold sheen unfigured. It  was sparely furnished, having but 
a  small table,  two chairs and a  bench;  but  at  either side  ther e  were 
curtained alcoves  and  well -clad beds  within with  vessels  and basins for  
washing. There were three high narrow windows that looked northward over 
the 
great  curve of  Anduin, still shrouded in  mists, towards the Emyn Muil and 
Rauros  far away.  Pippin had to climb on the bench to look out over the deep 
stone sill. 
     'Are you angry with me, Gandalf?' he  said, as their guide went out and 
closed the door. 'I did the best I could.' 
     'You did  indeed!' said Gandalf,  laughing suddenly; and  he  came  and 
stood beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit's shoulders and gazing 
out  of the window.  Pippin glanced in  some  wonder  at the face now  close 
beside his own, for the  sound of that laugh had been gay and merry.  Yet in  
the wizard's  face he saw  at first only lines of care and sorrow; though as 
he looked more intently he perceived that under all there was a great joy: a  
fountain of mirth enough to set a kingdom laughing, were it to gush forth. 
     'Indeed you did your best,' said the wizard; 'and I hope that it may be 
long  before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between two such 
terrible old  men.  Still the Lord of Gondor  learned more from you than you  
may have  guessed, Pippin. You  could not hide the fact that Bor omir did not 
lead the Company from Moria, and that there was one among you of high 
honour 
who was coming  to Minas Tirith;  and that  he had a famous sword. Men think  
much about the stories of  old  days in Gondor;  and Denethor has given long 
thought  to the rhyme and to  the words  Isildur's  Bane, since Boromir went 
away. 
     'He  is not as other  men  of  this  time,  Pippin, and whatever be his 
descent  from  father  to son, by some chance the blood  of Westernesse runs 
nearly true in him; as it does in his other son, Faramir, and yet did not in 
Boromir whom he  loved best. He has long sight. He can perceive, if he bends 

####-his will thither, much of what is passing in the minds of men, even of those 
that dwell far off. It is difficult to deceive him, and dangerous to try. 
     'Remember that! For you  are  now  sworn to his  service. I do not know 
what put it into your head, or your heart, to do that. But it was well done. 
I  did not hinder  it,  for  generous deed should  not  be  checked  by cold 
counsel.  It  touched  his  heart,  as  well (may I  say it) as pleasing his 
humour. And at least you are free  now  to move  about as  you will in Minas 
Tirith - when you are not on  duty. For there is another side to it. You are 
at his command; and he will not  forget. Be wary still!' 
     He fell silent and sighed. 'Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may 
bring. For  one thing, tomorrow will  be certain to bring  worse than today, 
for many days  to  come. And there is nothing more that I can do to help it. 
The board is set, and the pieces are moving. One piece that I greatly desire 
to find is Faramir, now the heir of Denethor.  I do not think  that he is in 
the City; but I have had no  time to gather news. I must go.  Pippin. I must  
go to this lords' council and learn what I  can. But the Enemy has the move, 
and he is about to open his full game.  And pawns are likely to see  as much  
of it  as  any,  Peregrin son of Paladin,  soldier  of  Gondor. Sharpen your 
blade!' 
     Gandalf went to the door, and there he turned. 'I  am in haste Pippin,' 
he said. 'Do  me a favour when you go out. Even before you rest, if you  are 
not too weary. Go and find Shadowfax and see how  he is housed. These 
people 
are kindly to beasts, for they are a good  and wise folk, but they have less 
skill with horses than some.' 
     With that Gandalf went out;  and as he did so, there came the note of a  
clear sweet bell ringing in  a tower of  the citadel. Three strokes it rang, 
like silver in  the  air, and ceased: the third hour from the rising of  the 
sun. 
     After a minute Pippin went to  the door and  down the stair  and looked 
about the street. The sun was now  shining warm and bright,  and the  towers 
and tall houses cast long  clear-cut shadows westward.  High in the blue air 
Mount Mindolluin lifted its  white helm and snowy cloak.  Armed men  went to 
and fro in the ways of  the City, as if going at the striking of the hour to 
changes of post and duty. 
     'Nine o'clock we'd call it in the Shire,' said Pippin aloud to himself.  
'Just  the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring  sunshine. 

####-And  how I  should like  breakfast! Do these  people ever  have it, or is it 
over? And when do they have dinner, and where?' 
     Presently he noticed a man, clad  in  black and white, coming along the 
narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards him. Pippin felt lonely 
and made up his mind to speak as the man passed; but he had no need. The man 
came straight up to him. 
     'You are Peregrin the Halfling?' he said. 'I am told that you have been 
sworn to the  service of the  Lord and of the City. Welcome! He held out his 
hand and Pippin took it. 
     'I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I  
have been sent  to you to teach you the pass-words, and to  tell you some of 
the many things that  no doubt you  will  wish to know. And  for my part,  I 
would learn of you also.  For  never before have  we seen a halfling in this 
land and though we have heard rumour of them, little is said of them in  any 
tale that we know. Moreover you are a friend of Mithrandir.  Do you know him 
well?' 
     'Well,' said Pippin.  'I  have known of  him all my short  life, as you  
might say; and lately  I have travelled far with him. But there  is  much to 
read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more  than a page or two.  
Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of 
our Company, I think, who really knew him.' 
     'Aragorn?' said Beregond. 'Who is he?' 
     'Oh,' stammered  Pippin, 'he was a  man who went  about with us. I think  
he is in Rohan now.' 
     'You have  been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask you of 
that land also;  for we put much of what little hope we have  in its people. 
But I am forgetting my errand, which was first to answer what you would ask. 
What would you know, Master Peregrin?' 
     'Er well,' said Pippin, 'if I may venture to  say so, rather  a burning 
question  in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that?  
I mean, what  are  the  meal-times, if you  understand me, and where is  the 
dining-room, if there is one?  And the inns? I looked, but never a one could 
I see as we rode up, though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught  of 
ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.' 
     Beregond looked at him  gravely. 'An old campaigner,  I see,'  he said. 
'They say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next  hope of food 
and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself. Then you have not  yet 

####-eaten today?' 
     'Well, yes,  to speak in courtesy, yes,' said Pippin. 'But no more than 
a cup of wine  and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but  he 
racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is hungry work.' 
     Beregond laughed. 'At the table small men may  do the greater deeds, we 
say. But you  have broken  your fast  as well as any man in the Citadel, and 
with  greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower  of guard and is now in 
posture  of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take  a morsel in the grey  light, 
and go  to our duties  at  the opening hour. But do not despair!' He laughed 
again,  seeing the  dismay in Pippin's  face. 'Those who have had heavy duty 
take somewhat  to refresh  their strength  in the mid-morning. Then there is 
the  nuncheon,  at noon or  after as  duties allow; and men  gather for  the 
daymeal, and such mirth as there still may be, about the hour of sunset. 
     'Come! We will walk a little and then go find us  some refreshment, and 
eat and drink on the battlement, and survey the fair morning.' 
     'One moment!' said Pippin blushing. 'Greed, or hunger by your courtesy,  
put it out of my mind. But Gandalf, Mithrandir as you call  him, asked me to 
see to his horse  - Shadowfax,  a  great steed of Rohan, and the apple of the 
king's  eye, I  am told, though he  has  given  him  to  Mithrandir  for his 
services. I think his new master loves the beast  better than  he loves many 
men, and if his  good  will is  of  any value to this  city,  you will treat 
Shadowfax with all honour: with greater  kindness than you have treated this 
hobbit, if it is possible.' 
     'Hobbit?' said Beregond. 
     'That is what we call ourselves,' said Pippin. 
     'I am glad to learn it,' said Beregond, 'for now I may say that strange 
accents  do not   mar fair speech,  and hobbits are  a  fair-spoken folk. But 
come! You shall make me acquainted with this good  horse. I love beasts, and 
we  see  them  seldom  in this  stony city;  for my  people  came  from  the 
mountain-vales, and before that from Ithilien. But fear not! The visit shall 
be short, a mere call of courtesy, and we will go thence to the butteries.' 
     Pippin found that Shadowfax had been well housed and tended. For in the 
sixth circle, outside the walls of the citadel, there were some fair stables 
where  a   few  swift  horses  were  kept,  hard  by  the  lodgings  of  the 
errand-riders of  the  Lord: messengers always ready  to  go at  the  urgent 
command of Denethor or his  chief  captains. But  now all the horses and the  
riders were out and away. 

####-     Shadowfax  whinnied as Pippin  entered the stable and  turned his head. 
'Good morning!'  said Pippin.  'Gandalf will come  as soon as  he may. He is 
busy, but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and 
you resting, I hope, after your long labours.' 
     Shadowfax  tossed  his  head  and  stamped. But he allowed  Beregond to 
handle his head gently and stroke his great flanks. 
     'He looks  as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a  
great journey,' said Beregond. 'How  strong and proud  he is!  Where  is his 
harness? It should be rich and fair.' 
     'None is  rich  and fair  enough for him,' said Pippin.  'He will  have 
none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no 
bit, bridle,  whip,  or  thong  will  tame  him.  Farewell, Shadowfax!  Have 
patience. Battle is coming.' 
     Shadowfax lifted up his head and neighed, so that the stable shook, and 
they covered their ears.  Then they took their leave, seeing that the manger  
was well filled. 
     'And now for our  manger,' said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the 
citadel, and so  to a door in the north side of the great tower. There  they 
went  down a  long  cool stair into a  wide alley lit with lamps. There were 
hatches in the walls at the side, and one of these was open. 
     'This  is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the  Guard.' said 
Beregond.  'Greetings,  Targon!' he called through the hatch.  'It  is early 
yet, but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into his service. He has 
ridden long and far with a tight belt, and has had sore labour this morning, 
and he is hungry. Give us what you have!' 
     They got there bread, and butter, and cheese  and  apples:  the last of 
the  winter store,  wrinkled but  sound and sweet;  and a leather flagon  of 
new-drawn ale, and  wooden platters  and cups. They put  all into  a  wicker  
basket and climbed back into the sun; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place 
at  the  east  end of  the  great out-thrust battlement where  there was  an 
embrasure in  the walls with a stone seat beneath the sill. From there  they 
could look out on the morning over the world. 
     They  ate  and drank; and they  talked now of  Gondor and its  ways and 
customs, now  of the Shire and the strange countries that  Pippin  had seen. 
And ever as they talked Beregond  was more amazed,  and looked with  greater  
wonder  at the  hobbit, swinging his short  legs as he sat  on the seat,  or  
standing tiptoe upon it to peer over the sill at the lands below. 

####-     'I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin,' said Beregond, 'that to us 
you look almost as one of our children, a lad of nine summers or so; and yet  
you have endured  perils  and seen marvels that few of our  greybeards could 
boast of. I thought  it was the whim of  our Lord to take him  a noble page, 
after the manner of the kings of old, they say. But I see that it is not so, 
and you must pardon my foolishness.' 
     'I do,' said Pippin. 'Though you are  not far  wrong. I am still little 
more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people, and it will be four years 
yet  before I "come of age", as we say in the Shire: But do not bother about 
me. Come and look and tell me what I can see.' 
     The  sun was now  climbing, and the  mists in the  vale below  had been 
drawn up. The last of them  were  floating away, just  overhead, as wisps of 
white cloud borne  on  the  stiffening breeze from  the East,  that  was now 
flapping and tugging the flags and white standards of the citadel. Away down 
in the valley-bottom, five leagues or  so as  the eye leaps, the Great River  
could now  be seen grey  and glittering, coming  out of the  north-west, and 
bending in a mighty sweep south and west again, till it was lost to  view in 
a haze and shimmer, far beyond which lay the Sea fifty leagues away. 
     Pippin could see all the  Pelennor laid out before him, dotted into the 
distance with farmsteads  and little  walls, barns  and  byres, but  nowhere 
could he see any kine  or other  beasts.  Many  roads and tracks crossed the 
green fields,  and there  was much coming and going: wains moving  in  lines 
towards the Great Gate, and  others passing  out.  Now and again  a horseman 
would ride up, and leap from  the saddle  and hasten into the City. But most  
of the traffic went out along the chief highway,  and that turned south, and 
then  bending  swifter than the River skirted the hills and passed soon from 
sight.  It was wide  and well-paved, and along its eastern  edge ran a broad 
green riding-track, and beyond that a wall . On the ride horsemen galloped to  
and  fro, but all the  street seemed to be  choked with great  covered wains 
going  south.  But  soon Pippin  saw that  all was in fact well-ordered: the 
wains were  moving in  three  lines,  one swifter  drawn  by horses; another  
slower, great waggons with fair housings of many colours, drawn by oxen; and 
along the west rim of the road many smaller carts hauled by trudging men. 
     'That is the  road  to the  vales of  Tumladen and  Lossarnach, and the 
mountain-villages,  and then on  to Lebennin,' said  Beregond. 'There  go the 
last  of  the  wains that bear away to refuge the aged the children, and the 
women that must go  with them.  They must all  be gone from the Gate and the 

####-road  clear for a league  before  noon: tha t was the  order.  It  is  a  sad 
necessity.'  He sighed. 'Few, maybe, of those now sundered will meet  again.  
And there  were  always too few children  in  this  city; but now there  are 
none-save some young lads  that will not depart,  and may  find some task to 
do: my own son is one of them.' 
     They fell silent for a while. Pippin gazed anxiously eastward, as if at 
any moment he might see thousands of orcs pouring over the fields. 'What can 
I see there?' he asked, pointing down to the  middle of the great  curve  of 
the Anduin. 'Is that another city, or what is it?' 
     'It was  a city,'  said Beregond, 'the chief city of Gondor,  of  which 
this  was only a fortress. For that is the ruin of Osgiliath  on either side 
of Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago. Yet we won it back in 
the  days of  the youth  of Denethor: not to dwell in,  but  to  hold as  an 
outpost, and  to rebuild  the  bridge for the  passage of our arms. And then 
came the Fell Riders out of Minas Morgul.' 
     'The Black R iders?' said Pippin, opening his eyes,  and they  were wide 
and dark with an old fear re-awakened. 
     'Yes,  they  were  black,' said  Beregond,  'and  I  see  that you know 
something of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.' 
     'I know of them,' said  Pippin softly,  'but I will not  speak of  them 
now, so near, so near.' He  broke  off  and lifted his eyes above the River, 
and  it  seemed to  him that  all  he could  see was  a vast and threatening 
shadow. Perhaps it was mountains looming on the verge of sight, their jagged 
edges softened by wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air; perhaps it was but a  
cloud-wall, and beyond that again a yet deeper gloom. But  even as he looked 
it seemed to his eyes that the gloom was growing and gathering, very slowly, 
slowly rising to smother the regions of the sun. 
     'So  near to Mordor?' said  Beregond quietly.  'Yes,  there it lies. We 
seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: sometimes it 
seems fainter and more distant;  sometimes nearer and darker. It  is growing 
and  darkening now; and  therefore  our fear  and disquiet grow too. And the 
Fell Riders, less  than a year ago they won back the crossings, and  many of 
our best men were  slain.  Boromir it  was that drove  the enemy at last back  
from this western shore, and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a  
little  while. But  we  await  now  a new onslaught there.  Maybe the  chief 
onslaught of the war that comes.' 
     'When?' said Pippin. 'Have  you a  guess?  For I saw the  beacons  last 

####-night and  the errand-riders; and  Gandalf said that it was a sign that  war 
had begun. He seemed in a desperate hurry. But now everything seems to  have 
slowed up again.' 
     'Only because  everything is now ready,' said Beregond. 'It  is but the 
deep breath before the plunge.' 
     'But why were the beacons lit last night?' 
     'It is  over-late  to  send  for aid  when you  are  already besieged,' 
answered Beregond. 'But I  do  not  know the  counsel of  the  Lord  and his 
captains. They have many ways of gathering news.  And  the Lord Denethor  is 
unlike  other men: he sees far. Some  say that as he sits alone in his  high 
chamber  in the Tower at night, and bends his thought  this way and that, he  
can read somewhat of the future; and that he  will  at times search even the 
mind of the  Enemy, wrestling  with  him. And so it  is that he is old, worn 
before his  time. But however that may be, my lord Faramir is abroad, beyond 
the River on some perilous errand, and he may have sent tidings.  
     'But if you would know what I think set  the beacons ablaze, it was the 
news  that came yestereve  out of Lebennin. There is a great  fleet  drawing 
near to the mouths of Anduin, manned by  the corsairs of Umbar in the South. 
They have long ceased to fear the might of Gondor, and they have allied them 
with the Enemy, and now  make  a heavy stroke in  his cause. For this attack  
will draw off much of the help  that  we looked  to  have  from Lebennin and  
Belfalas, where folk are hardy a nd numerous. All the more do our thoughts go 
north to Rohan; and the more glad are we for these tidings  of  victory that 
you bring. 
     'And yet'  - he paused and stood up, and looked round, north,  east, and 
south - 'the doings at Isengard  should warn us that we are  caught now in a  
great net and strategy. This is no longer a  bickering at the fords, raiding 
from Ithilien and from Anurien, ambushing and pillaging. This is a great war 
long-planned, and we are but one piece in it, whatever pride may say. Things 
move  in the  far  East beyond the  Inland Sea, it is reported; and north in 
Mirkwood and beyond; and south in Harad. And now all  realms shall be put to 
the test, to stand, or fall  - under the Shadow. 
     'Yet, Master Peregrin, we have this honour:  ever we bear  the brunt of 
the  chief  hatred  of the Dark Lord, for that hatred comes down out of  the 
depths of  time and over the deeps  of the Sea. Here will the  hammer -stroke 
fall hardest. And for that reason Mithrandir came  hither in such haste. For 
if we fall, who shall stand? And, Master  Peregrin, do you see any hope that 

####-we shall stand?' 
     Pippin did not answer. He looked at the great walls, and the towers and 
brave banners, and  the sun in the high sky, and then at the gathering gloom 
in the East; and he thought of the long fingers of that Shadow: of  the orcs 
in  the woods and the mountains, the treason of Isengard,  the birds of evil 
eye, and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire - and of the winged 
terror,  the Nazgyl. He  shuddered, and hope seemed  to wither. And even  at 
that moment the sun for a second faltered and was obscured, as though a dark 
wing had  passed across it. Almost beyond hearing he thought he caught, high 
and far up in the heavens, a cry: faint, but heart-quelling, cruel and cold. 
He blanched and cowered against the wall. 
     'What was that?' asked Beregond. 'You also felt something?' 
     'Yes,' muttered Pippin. 'It is the  sign of our fall, and the shadow of 
doom, a Fell Rider of the air.' 
     'Yes, the  shadow of doom,' said Beregond. 'I fear  that  Minas  Tirith 
shall fall. Night comes. The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away.' 
     For a time they  sat together with bowed heads and did  not speak. Then 
suddenly Pippin looked up and  saw  that  the  sun was still shining and the 
banners still streaming in the breeze. He shook  himself. 'It is passed,' he 
said. 'No, my  heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and 
is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still  upon 
our knees.' 
     'Rightly said!' cried Beregond, rising and striding to and  fro.  'Nay, 
though all things  must come  utterly to an  end  in  time, Gondor shall not 
perish yet. Not though  the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build 
a hill of carrion before them. There  are still other fastnesses, and secret 
ways of escape  into the mountains. Hope and memory shall live still in some 
hidden valley where the grass is green.' 
     'All the same, I  wish it was over for good or ill.' said Pippin. 'I am 
no warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle; but waiting on the edge 
of one  that  I  can't escape  is  worst  of all.  What a long  day it seems 
already! I should  be happier, if we  were not obliged  to stand and  watch, 
making  no move, striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in 
Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.' 
     'Ah, there  you  lay  your finger on  the  sore  that  many feel!' said 
Beregond. 'But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more bold 
than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can 

####-be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song, as he is, and yet a man 
of hardihood  and swift  judgement in the field. But such is  Faramir.  Less 
reckless and eager than Boromir, but  not less resolute. Yet what indeed can 
he do? We cannot assault  the mountains of  -  of yonder  realm. Our reach is 
shortened, and we cannot strike till some foe comes within it. Then our hand  
must be heavy!' He smote the hilt of his sword. 
     Pippin looked at  him: tall and proud and noble, as all the men that he 
had yet seen in that land; and  with  a glitter in  his eye as he thought of 
the battle. 'Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,' he thought, but 
he  said nothing.  'A  pawn did  Gandalf  say?  Perhaps  but  on  the  wrong 
chessboard.' 
     So they  talked  until the  sun  reached  its height, and suddenly  the 
noon-bells were rung, and there was a  stir in the citadel; for all save the 
watchmen were going to their meal. 
     'Will you come with me?' said Beregond. 'You may join my  mess for this 
day. I do not know to  what  company  you will be  assigned; or the Lord may 
hold you at his own command. But you will be welcome. And it will be well to 
meet as many men as you may, while there is yet time.' 
     'I shall be glad  to come,' said Pippin. 'I am  lonely, to tell you the 
truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had  no one to talk  
to  or jest with. Perhaps  I could  really join your  company?  Are  you the  
captain? If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?' 
     'Nay, nay,' Beregond laughed, 'I am no captain. Neither office nor rank  
nor lordship  have I,  being but a plain man of arms of the Third Company of 
the Citadel. Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only a man of arms of the  Guard of 
the Tower of Gondor  is held worthy in the City, and such men have honour in 
the land.' 
     'Then it is far beyond me,' said Pippin. 'Take me back to our room, and 
if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like  - as your guest. ' 
     Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message; so  Pippin went  
with Beregond and was made known  to  the  men of the  Third Company. And 
it 
seemed that Beregond got as much honour from it as his guest, for Pippin was 
very welcome.  There  had  already  been  much talk  in  the  citadel  about 
Mithrandir's companion and his  long  closeting with the  Lord;  and  rumour 
declared that a Prince  of the Halflings had  come out of the North to offer  
allegiance to Gondor and five  thousand  swords.  And some said that when the 

####-Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind him a halfling warrior, small 
maybe, but doughty. 
     Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this  hopeful  tale,  he could 
not be rid of his new  rank, only fitting, men thought, to one befriended by 
Boromir and honoured by  the Lord Denethor; and they thanked him for  
coming 
among them, and  hung on his words and stories of the outlands, and gave him 
as much food and ale as he could  wish. Indeed his  only  trouble was to  be 
'wary' according  to the counsel of Gandalf, and  not to let  his tongue wag 
freely after the manner of a hobbit among friends. 
     At length  Beregond  rose. 'Farewell for  this time!'  he said. 'I have 
duty now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if you  are 
lonely, as you  say, maybe  you would like a  merry guide about the City. My 
son would go with you gladly. A good lad, I may say. If that pleases you, go 
down to  the  lowest  circle and ask for  the Old  Guesthouse  in  the  Rath 
Celerdain, the Lampwrights' Street. You will find him  there with other lads 
that are remaining in the City. There may be things worth seeing down at the 
Great Gate ere the closing.' 
     He went out, and soon after all the  others followed. The day was st ill 
fine, though  it  was  growing hazy,  and it was  hot for March, even so far 
southwards. Pippin felt sleepy,  but  the  lodging seemed cheerless, and  he 
decided to go down and  explore the City. He took a few morsels that he  had 
saved to Shadowfax,  and  they were  graciously accepted,  though the  horse 
seemed to have no lack. Then he walked on down many winding ways.  
     People  stared  much  as  he  passed. To  his  face  men  were  gravely 
courteous, saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands 
upon the breast; but  behind him he heard many calls,  as those out of doors 
cried to others within  to come  and see the Prince  of the  Halflings,  the 
companion of Mithrandir. Many used some other tongue than the Common 
Speech, 
but  it  was not long before he  learned at least what was meant by  Ernil i 
Pheriannath  and knew that his title had gone down before him into the City. 
     He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to 
the lowest and widest circle, a nd there  he was directed to the Lampwrights' 
Street, a broad way running towards  the  Great Gate. In it he found the Old 
Guesthouse, a large building of grey weathered stone with  two wings running 

####-back from the street, and between them a narrow greensward, behind which 
was 
the many-windowed house, fronted along its whole  width by  a pillared porch 
and  a flight of steps down on  to  the grass.  Boys were playing  among the 
pillars,  the only children  that Pippin had  seen  in Minas Tirith,  and he 
stopped to look at them. Presently one of them caught sight of him, and with 
a  shout  he sprang across  the grass and  came into the street, followed by 
several others. There he stood in front of Pippin, looking him up and down. 
     'Greetings!' said  the la d. 'Where do you come from? You are a stranger  
in the City.' 
     'I was,' said Pippin; 'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.' 
     'Oh  come!' said the lad. 'Then we are all men  here.  But how old  are 
you, and what is your name? I am ten  years a lready, and  shall soon be five 
feet.  I am  taller  than you. But then my father  is  a  Guard, one of  the 
tallest. What is your father?' 
     'Which question  shall  I  answer first?' said Pippin. 'My father farms 
the  lands  round Whitwell  near  Tuckborough in  the  Shire.  I  am  nearly 
twenty-nine, so I pass you there; though I am but four feet, and  not likely 
to grow any more, save sideways.' 
     'Twenty-nine!' said the lad  and whistled. 'Why, you are  quite old! As 
old as my  uncle Iorlas. Still,' he added hopefully, 'I  wager I could stand 
you on your head or lay you on your back.' 
     'Maybe you could, if I let you,' said Pippin with a laugh. 'And maybe I 
could  do  the  same  to  you: we know some  wrestling tricks in  my  little 
country.  Where,  let  me tell  you,  I am considered  uncommonly large  and 
strong; and I have never allowed anyone  to stand me  on  my  head. So if it 
came to a trial and nothing else would serve, I might have  to kill you. For  
when you  are older, you will learn that folk are not always what they seem;  
and though  you may have taken me for a soft stranger -lad and easy prey, let  
me  warn you: I am not,  I  am a halfling,  hard, bold,  and wicked!' Pippin 
pulled such  a  grim face  that the boy stepped  back a pace, but at once he 
returned with clenched fists and the light of battle in his eye. 
     'No!'  Pippin laughed. 'Don't  believe what strangers say of themselves 
either! I am  not a fighter.  But it  would be politer in any  case for  the 
challenger to say who he is.' 
     The boy drew himself  up  proudly.  'I am Bergil son of Beregond of the 
Guards,' he said. 

####-     'So I thought,' said Pippin, 'for you look like your father. I know him 
and he sent me to find you.' 
     'Then why did you not say so at once?' said Bergil, and suddenly a look  
of dismay came over his face. 'Do not  tell me that he has changed his mind,  
and will send me away with the maidens! But no, the last wains have gone.' 
     'His message is less bad than that, if not good.' said Pippin. 'He says 
that if you would  prefer it to standing me  on  my head, you might show  me 
round the  City for  a while  and cheer my loneliness. I can  tell  you some 
tales of far countries in return.' 
     Bergil  clapped his hands,  and laughed with relief.  'All is well,' he 
cried. 'Come then! We were  soon going to the  Gate  to look  on. We will go 
now.' 
     'What is happening there?' 
     'The  Captains  of the  Outlands  are  expected up the South  Road  ere 
sundown. Come with us and you will see.' 
     Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had  since he 
parted from Merry, and soon they  were laughing and  talking  gaily  as they 
went about  the streets, heedless of the many  glances  that men gave  them. 
Before long they found themselves in  a throng going towards the Great Gate. 
There Pippin went  up  much in  the esteem of Bergil,  for when he spoke his 
name and the pass-word the guard saluted  him and let  him pass through; and 
what was more, he allowed him to take his companion with him. 
     'That is good!' said Bergil. 'We boys are no longer allowed to pass the 
Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.' 
     Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men  along  the  verge of the road 
and of the great paved space into  which all the wa ys to  Minas Tirith  ran. 
All eyes were turned southwards, and soon a murmur rose: 'There is dust away 
there! They are coming!' 
     Pippin and Bergil  edged their way  forward to the front of the  crowd, 
and waited. Horns sounded at some distance, and the noise of cheering rolled 
towards them like a gathering wind. Then there was a loud trumpet-blast, and 
all about them people were shouting. 
     'Forlong! Forlong!' Pippin  heard men calling.  'What do  they say?' he 
asked. 
     'Forlong  has come,' Bergil answered; 'old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of 
Lossarnach. That is where  my grandsire  lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Good old 
Forlong!' 

####-     Leading the line there came walking a big thick -limbed horse, and on it 
sat a man of  wide  shoulders and  huge girth, but old and grey-bearded, yet 
mail-clad and  black-helmed and  bearing  a  long heavy  spear.  Behind  him 
marched  proudly  a  dusty  line  of  men,   well-armed  and  bearing  great 
battle-axes; grim-faced they were, and shorter  and  somewhat swarthier  than 
any men that Pippin had yet seen in Gondor. 
     'Forlong!' men shouted.  'True heart, true friend!  Forlong!'  But when 
the men of Lossarnach  had passed they muttered: 'So few! Two hundreds, 
what 
are they? We hoped for ten times the number. That will be the new tidings of 
the  black fleet.  They  are sparing only a tithe  of  their strength. Still 
every little is a gain.' 
     And  so  the  companies  came and  were hailed and  cheered  and passed 
through  the Gate, men of the Outlands marching to defend the City of Gondor  
in a dark hour; but always too few, always less than hope looked for or need 
asked. The  men of  Ringlu  Vale  behind the  son  of  their  lord, Dervorin 
striding  on foot: three hundreds. From  the uplands of  Morthond, the great 
Blackroot Vale,  tall Duinhir with  his sons, Duilin and  Derufin,  and five 
hundred bowmen. From the  Anfalas, the Langstrand far away,  a  long line of 
men of many sorts, hunters and herdsmen and men of little villages, scantily 
equipped  save for the hou sehold of Golasgil their lord. From Lamedon, a few 
grim hillmen without a  captain.  Fisher -folk of the Ethir, some hundred  or  
more spared from the ships. Hirluin the Fair of the Green Hills from Pinnath 
Gelin with three hundreds  of gallant green-clad men. And last and proudest,  
Imrahil,  Prince  of Dol Amroth,  kinsman of the  Lord, with  gilded banners 
bearing his token of the Ship and  the Silver Swan, and a company of knights 
in full harness riding grey horses; and behind them seven hundreds of men at 
arms, tall as lords, grey-eyed, dark-haired, singing as they came. 
     And  that was  all, less than  three thousands full told. No more would 
come. Their cries and the tramp of their feet passed into  the City and died 
away. The onlookers stood silent for a while. Dust hung  in the air, for the 
wind had  died and  the  evening  was heavy. Already  the  closing  hour was 
drawing nigh, and the red sun had gone behind  Mindolluin. Shadow  came 
down 
on the City. 
     Pippin  looked  up,  and  it  seemed to  him that  the  sky  had  grown 
ashen-grey, as  if a vast dust  and  smoke hung above  them, and  light came 

####-dully  through it. But in the West  the dying  sun had  set all  the fume on 
fire, and now Mindolluin stood black against a burning smoulder flecked  with 
embers. 'So ends a  fair day in wrath!' he said forgetful of the lad  at his 
side. 
     'So it  will, if  I  have not returned before the sundown-bells,'  said 
Bergil. 'Come! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.' 
     Hand  in hand they went  back into the City, the last to  pass the Gate 
before it  was  shut;  and as they  reached the Lampwrights'  Street all the 
bells in the towers tolled solemnly. Lights sprang in many windows, and from 
the houses and wards of the men at arms along the walls there came the sound 
of song. 
     'Farewell  for  this  time,'  said  Bergil.  'Take  my  greetings to my 
:father, and thank him for the company that he sent. Come again soon, I beg.  
Almost  I wish now that there was no war,  for we might have  had some merry 
times. We might have journeyed to Lossarnach, to my grandsire's house; it is 
good to be  there in Spring, the  woods and fields are  full of flowers. But 
maybe we will go thither together  yet.  They will never overcome our  Lord, 
and my father is very valiant. Farewell and return!' 
     They  parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel.  It seemed  a  
long way, and he  grew hot and  very hungry; and night closed down swift and 
dark.  Not a star pricked the sky. He  was late for the daymeal in the mess, 
and Beregond greeted him gladly, and sat him at his side to hear news of his 
son.  After the  meal Pippin stayed a while,  and then took his leave, for a  
strange gloom was on him, and now he desired very much to see Gandalf 
again. 
     'Can you find your way?' said Beregond at  the door of the  small hall, 
on the north side of the citadel, where  they had sat. 'It is a black night, 
and all the blacker  since  orders came that lights are  to be dimmed within 
the City, and none are to shine out from  the walls. And I can give you news 
of another order: you will be summoned to the Lord Denethor  early tomorrow.  
I  fear you will not  be for the Third  Company. Still we may  hope  to meet 
again. Farewell and sleep in peace!' 
     The lodging was   dark,  save  for a  little lantern  set  on the table. 
Gandalf was  not there.  Gloom settled  still  more  heavily  on Pippin.  He 
climbed on the bench  and tried  to  peer out of a window,  but it was  like 
looking  into a pool of ink. He  got down and closed the shutter and went to 
bed.  For a  while he lay and listened for  sounds  of Gandalf's return, and 

####-then he fell into an uneasy sleep. 
     In  the  night he was wakened by  a light, and he saw that  Gandalf had 
come and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain of the alcove. 
There were candles on the  table and rolls of parchment. He heard the wizard 
sigh, and mutter: 'When will Faramir return?' 
     'Hullo!' said Pippin, poking his head round the curtain. 'I thought you  
had forgotten  all about me. I am  glad  to see you back. It has been a long 
day.' 
     'But the night  will be too  short,' said  Gandalf.  'I have  come back  
here, for I  must have a  little peace,  alone. You should sleep,  in  a bed 
while you still  may. At the sunrise I  shall take you to the  Lord Denethor  
again. No, when the  summons  comes, not at sunrise. The Darkness has begun. 
There will be no dawn.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Passing of the Grey Company 

 
 
     Gandalf was gone, and the thudding  hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the  
night, when Merry came  back to Aragorn. He  had only a light bundle, for he 
had lost his pack at Parth  Galen, and all he had was a few useful things he 
had picked up among the wreckage of  Isengard. Hasufel was  already saddled. 
Legolas and Gimli with their horse stood close by. 
     'So four of the Company still remain,'  said Aragorn. 'We  will ride on 
together.  But  we  shall  not  go alone,  as  I  thought. The  king is  now 
determined  to set out at  once.  Since the coming of the winged  shadow, he 
desires to return to the hills under cover of night.' 
     'And then whither?' said Legolas.  
     'I cannot say yet,' Aragorn answered. 'As for the king, he will  go  to 
the muster that he commanded at Edoras,  four  nights from now. And there, I 
think, he will hear tidings of war, and the Riders of Rohan  will go down to 
Minas Tirith. But for myself, and any that will go with me . . .' 
     'I for one!' cried Legolas. 'And Gimli with him!' said the Dwarf. 
     'Well, for myself,' said Aragorn, 'it is dark before me. I must go down 
also to Minas Tirith, but I  do not yet see the  road. An hour long prepared 
approaches.' 
     'Don't leave me behind!'  said Merry. 'I have not been of much use yet; 
but I don't want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called for when all is 
over. I don't think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now. Though, 
of  course, the  king did say that I was to sit by  him when  he came to his 
house and tell him all about the Shire.' 
     'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and your road lies with him, I  think, Merry. But 
do  not  look for mirth at  the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere Thjoden 
sits  at ease  again  in  Meduseld.  Many hopes will wither  in this  bitter  
Spring.' 
     Soon all were ready  to depart:  twenty -four horses, with Gimli  behind 
Legolas,  and Merry  in front of Aragorn. Presently they were riding swiftly  
through the night. They had not long passed the mounds at the Fords of Isen, 
when a Rider galloped up from the rear of their line. 
     'My  lord,'  he said to  the king, 'there are horsemen behind us. As we 
crossed the fords I thought that  I heard them. Now we  are sure.  They  are 

####-overtaking us, riding hard.' 
     Thjoden at once called a halt. The Riders turned about and seized their 
spears.  Aragorn  dismounted and  set Merry on the  ground, and drawing  his 
sword he stood by the king's stirrup. Jomer and his esquire rode back to the 
rear. Merry felt more  like unneeded baggage than  ever, and he wondered, if 
there was a fight, what  he should do. Supposing the king's small escort was 
trapped and overcome, but  he escaped into the darkness  - alone in the wild  
fields of Rohan  with no idea of where he was in all the  endless miles? 'No 
good!' he thought. He drew his sword and tightened his belt. 
     The sinking moon was obscured by a great sailing cloud, but suddenly it 
rode  out clear  again. Then they all  heard the sound of  hoofs, and at the 
same moment they saw dark shapes coming  swiftly on the path from the fords.  
The moonlight glinted here and  there  on the points of spears. The number of 
the pursuers could  not be told, but they seemed  no fewer than  the  king's 
escort, at the least. 
     When they were some  fifty paces off,  Jomer  cried  in  a  loud voice: 
'Halt! Halt! Who rides in Rohan?' 
     The  pursuers  brought  their  steeds  to  a sudden  stand.  A  silence 
followed: and  then in the  moonlight, a  horseman could be seen dismounting 
and walking  slowly  forward. His hand  showed white as  he held it up, palm 
outward, in token of pea ce; but the king's men gripped their weapons. At ten 
paces the man stopped. He was  tall,  a dark standing shadow. Then his clear 
voice rang out. 
     'Rohan? Rohan did you say?  That is  a glad word.  We seek that land in 
haste from long afar.' 
     'You have found it,' said Jomer. 'When you crossed the fords yonder you  
entered it. But it is the realm of Thjoden  the King. None ride here save by 
his leave. Who are you? And what is your haste?' 
     'Halbarad D®nadan, Ranger  of the North I am,' cried the man. 'We  seek  
one Aragorn son of Arathorn, and we heard that he was in Rohan.' 
     'And  you have  found  him also!' cried  Aragorn. Giving his  reins  to 
Merry, he ran  forward and embraced  the newcomer. 'Halbarad!' he said.  'Of 
all joys this is the least expected!' 
     Merry breathed a sigh of relief. He had thought that this was some last 
trick of Saruman's, to waylay  the king  while he  had  only a few men about 
him;  but it seemed that there would be no need to die in Thjoden's defence,  
not yet at any rate. He sheathed his sword. 

####-     'All is well,' said Aragorn, turning back. 'Here are some of my own kin 
from  the far land where I dwelt. But why they come, and how many  they  be, 
Halbarad shall tell us.' 
     'I  have thirty  with me,' said Halbarad. 'That is  all  of our kindred 
that could be gathered in  haste; but the  brethren Elladan and Elrohir have 
ridden with us, desiring to go to  the  war. We rode as swiftly as we  might 
when your summons came.' 
     'But  I  did  not summon you,' said Aragorn,  'save  only  in wish.  My 
thoughts have often turned to you, and seldom more than tonight; yet I  have 
sent  no  word. But come! All such matters must wait. You find us riding  in 
haste and danger. Ride with us now, if the king will give his leave. ' 
     Thjoden was indeed glad of the news. 'It  is well!' he said.  'If these 
kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights 
will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.' 
     Then the Riders  set out again, and Aragor n  for a while rode with  the 
D®nedain; and when they had spoken of tidings in the North and in the South, 
Elrohir said to him: 
     'I bring word to you from my father: The days are short. If thou art in  
haste, remember the Paths of the Dead. ' 
     'Always my days  have seemed  to me  too short to  achieve  my desire,' 
answered Aragorn. 'But great indeed will be my haste ere I take that road.' 
     'That  will soon  be seen,' said Elrohir. 'But let us speak  no more of 
these things upon the open road!' 
     And  Aragorn said to Halbarad: 'What is  that that  you bear, kinsman?' 
For  he  saw that instead  of a  spear he bore a  tall  staff, as it were  a  
standard, but it was close-furled  in a black cloth  bound about  with  many 
thongs. 
     'It is a gift that  I bring  you  from the Lady of Rivendell,' answered 
Halbarad.  'She wrought it in secret,  and long was the making. But she also 
sends word  to you: The days now are short.  Either our hope cometh, or  all  
hopes end. Therefore I  send  thee what I have  made  for  thee. Fare  well, 
Elfstone!' 
     And Aragorn said:  'Now I  know  what you bear. Bear it still for  me a  
while!' And  he turned and  looked away to the North under  the great stars,  
and then he fell silent and spoke no more while the night's journey lasted. 
     The night  was old  and the East grey  when  they rode  up at last from 
Deeping-coomb and came back to the Hornburg. There they were to lie and rest  

####-for a brief while and take counsel. 
     Merry  slept  until  he was  roused by Legolas and  Gimli.  'The Sun is 
high,'  said Legolas. 'All others are  up and doing.  Come, Master Sluggard, 
and look at this place while you may!' 
     'There  was a  battle here  three  nights ago,' said Gimli,  'and  here 
Legolas and  I  played a game that I won only  by a single orc. Come and see 
how it was!  And there  are caves, Merry, caves of  wonder!  Shall we  visit 
them, Legolas, do you think?' 
     'Nay!  There is no  time,' said the Elf. 'Do  not spoil the wonder with 
haste! I have given you my wor d to return hither with you, if a day of peace 
and  freedom comes  again. But it is now near to noon, and  at that hour  we 
eat, and then set out again, I hear.' 
     Merry  got up  and yawned. His few hours'  sleep  had not  been  nearly 
enough; he was  t ired and rather dismal. He missed Pippin,  and felt that he 
was only a burden, while everybody was making plans for  speed in a business 
that he did not fully understand. 'Where is Aragorn?' he asked. 
     'In a  high chamber of the Burg,' said  Legolas. 'He has neither rested 
nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that he must take 
thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with him;  but some dark doubt 
or care sits on him.' 
     'They are a strange company, these  newcomers,'  said Gimli. 'Stout men 
and lordly  they are,  and the  Riders  of Rohan look  almost as boys beside 
them; for they are grim men  of face, worn like weathered rocks for the most  
part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.' 
     'But even as Aragorn they  are courteous, if they break  their silence.' 
said  Legolas. 'And have  you marked  the brethren Elladan and Elrohir? Less 
sombre is their  gear than  the  others', and  they are fair and  gallant as 
Elven-lords;  and that  is not  to be wondered  at in the sons of  Elrond of 
Rivendell.' 
     'Why have  they come? Have you heard?' asked Merry. He had now dressed, 
and he flung  his grey cloak about his shoulders; and  the  three passed out 
together towards the ruined gate of the Burg. 
     'They answered  a  summons,  as you  heard,'  said Gimli. 'Word  came to 
Rivendell, they  say: Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the D®nedain ride 
to him in Rohan! But whence this message came they are now in doubt. 
Gandalf 
sent it, I would guess.' 

####-     'Nay, Galadriel,' said  Legolas. 'Did she not speak  through Gandalf of 
the ride of the Grey Company from the North?' 
     'Yes,  you have it,' said Gimli. 'The Lady of  the Wood! She  read many 
hearts and  desires. Now why did  not we wish for some  of our own kinsfolk, 
Legolas?' 
     Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away north and 
east, and his fair face was troubled. 'I do not  think that any would come,' 
he answered. 'They have no need to ride to war; war already marches on their 
own lands.' 
     For  a while the three companions walked together, speaking of this and 
that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken gate, and passed 
the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside the road, until they stood  
on  Helm's  Dike  and  looked into the Coomb. The Death Down  already  stood 
there, black and  tall and stony, and the great trampling and scoring of the 
grass by the Huorns could be  plainly  seen. The Dunlendings and many men of 
the garrison of the Burg were at work on the Dike or in the fields and about 
the battered walls behind;  yet all seemed  strangely  quiet: a weary valley 
resting after a  great storm. Soon they turned  back and went  to the midday 
meal in the hall of the Burg. 
     The  king was already there, and as soon as they  entered he called for  
Merry and  had a seat set for him at his side. 'It is not  as I  would  have 
it,' said Thjoden; 'for this is little like  my  fair  house  in Edoras. And 
your friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long ere we si t, 
you and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no time for feasting 
when  I return  thither. But  come  now!  Eat and drink,  and  let us  speak 
together while we may. And then you shall ride with me.' 
     'May I?' said Merry, surprised and delighted.  'That would be splendid!' 
He had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words. 'I am afraid I am 
only in everybody's way,' he stammered; 'but  I should like to do anything I 
could, you know.' 
     'I doubt  it not,' said the king.  'I have had  a  good  hill -pony made 
ready for you. He will  bear you as swift as any horse by the  roads that we 
shall  take. For I will ride  from the  Burg  by mountain paths, not  by the 
plain, and so come to Edoras by way of Dunharrow where the Lady Jowyn 
awaits 
me. You shall  be  my esquire,  if you  will.  Is  there gear of war in this 
place, Jomer, that my sword-thain could use?' 

####-     'There are no great weapon -hoards here, lord.' answered Jomer. 'Maybe a  
light helm might be found to fit him; but  we have no   mail or sword for one 
of his stature.' 
     'I have a sword,' said Merry, climbing from his  seat, and drawing from 
its black sheath his small bright blade. Filled suddenly with love  for this 
old man, he knelt on one knee,  and took  his hand and kissed it. 'May I lay 
the  sword  of  Meriadoc of the Shire on your lap Thjoden  King?' he  cried. 
'Receive my service, if you will!' 
     'Gladly will I take it,' said the king; and laying his  long old  hands 
upon  the brown hair  of the hobbit;  he blessed  him. 'Rise  now, Meriadoc, 
esquire  of Rohan of the household of  Meduseld!' he said.  'Take your sword 
and bear it unto good fortune!' 
     'As a father you shall be to me,' said Merry. 
     'For a little while,' said Thjoden. 
     They talked then together as they ate, until presently Jomer spoke. 'It 
is near the hour that we set for our going, lord,' he said. 'Shall I bid men 
sound the horns? But where is  Aragorn?  His place is empty and  he  has not 
eaten.' 
     'We  will make ready to ride,'  said Thjoden; 'but let  word be sent to 
the Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh.' 
     The king with his guard and Merry at his side passed down from the gate 
of  the Burg to  where the Riders were assembling  on  the green.  Many were 
already mounted. It would be a   great company; for the king was leaving only 
a small garrison in the Burg, and all who could be spared were riding to the 
weapontake at  Edoras. A  thousand spears  had indeed already ridden away at 
night; but still there would be some five hundred more  to go  with the king, 
for the most part men from the fields and dales of Westfold. 
     A little  apart  the Rangers sat, silent,  in an ordered company, armed 
with  spear and bow  and sword. They were  clad in  cloaks of dark grey, and 
their hoods were ca st now over helm  and head. Their  horses were strong and 
of  proud  bearing, but rough-haired; and  one stood there without  a rider, 
Aragorn's own horse that they  had  brought from the North; Roheryn  was his 
name. There was no gleam  of stone  or gold, nor any fair thing in all their 
gear and harness: nor did their  riders bear any badge  or  token, save only 
that each  cloak was  pinned  upon the  left shoulder by a brooch of  silver  
shaped like a rayed star. 
     The  king mounted his horse, Snowmane,  and Merry sat beside him on his 

####-pony: Stybba was his name. Presently Jomer came out from the gate, and  with 
him was Aragorn, and Halbarad bearing the great staff close-furled in black, 
and two tall men, neither young nor old So much alike were they, the  sons of 
Elrond,  that few could tell  them apart: dark-haired,  grey-eyed, and their 
faces elven-fair,  clad  alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver -grey. 
Behind them walked Legolas and  Gimli. But Merry had eyes only for  
Aragorn, 
so startling  wa s the  change that he saw  in  him, as if in one  night many 
years had fallen on his head. Grim was his face, grey-hued and weary. 
     'I  am troubled in mind, lord,'  he said, standing by the king's horse. 
'I have  heard strange words,  and I see new per ils far off. I have laboured 
long  in thought, and  now  I fear that I must change my  purpose. Tell  me, 
Thjoden, you ride now to Dunharrow, how long will it be ere you come there?' 
     'It is now a full hour past noon,' said Jomer. 'Before the night of the 
third day  from  now we should  come to the Hold. The Moon will then be  one 
night past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the 
day after. More  speed we cannot make, if  the strength of  Rohan  is to  be 
gathered.' 
     Aragorn  was  silent for a moment. 'Three days,' he murmured, 'and  the 
muster  of Rohan will  only  be begun. But  I  see  that  it  cannot now  be 
hastened.'  He looked up, and it seemed that  he had made some decision; his 
face  was less troubled. Then, by  our leave, lord, I must take new  counsel 
for myself  and my  kindred. We must  ride  our  own road, and  no longer in  
secret. For me  the time of stealth  has  passed.  I  will ride east by  the 
swiftest way, and I will take the Paths of the Dead.' 
     'The Paths of the Dead!' said Thjoden, and trembled. 'Why do  you speak 
of them?' Jomer turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it seemed to Merry that the 
faces of  the Riders  that sat within  hearing turned pale at the words. 'If 
there be in  truth  such paths, ' said Thjoden, 'their gate  is in Dunharrow;  
but no living man may pass it.' 
     'Alas! Aragorn my friend!' said Jomer. 'I had hoped that we should ride 
to war together; but if you seek the  Paths of the Dead, then our parting is 
come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun.' 
     'That road  I will take, nonetheless,' said Aragorn. 'But I say to you, 
Jomer, that in battle  we may yet meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor  
should stand between.' 
     'You will do as you wi ll, my lord Aragorn,' said Thjoden.  'It  is your 

####-doom, maybe,  to  tread  strange paths that  others  dare not.  This parting 
grieves  me, and  my strength  is  lessened by it; but now  I must take  the 
mountain-roads and delay no longer. Farewell!' 
     'Farewell,  lord!' said  Aragorn.  'Ride unto great  renown!  Farewell, 
Merry! I leave you in  good hands,  better  than we hoped when we hunted the 
orcs to Fangorn. Legolas and Gimli  will still hunt with me,  I hope; but we 
shall not forget you.' 
     'Good-bye!'  said  Merry.  He could find no more to say.  He  felt very 
small, and he was puzzled and depressed by all these gloomy words. More than 
ever he  missed the  unquenchable cheerfulness  of Pippin.  The  Riders were 
ready, and their horses were fidgeting;  he wished they would start arid get 
it over. 
     Now Thjoden  spoke to Jomer, and he lifted up his hand and cried aloud,  
and  with that word the Riders set forth. They  rode over the Dike  and down 
the  Coomb,  and  then,  turning swiftly  eastwards, they  took  a path that 
skirted  the foothills for a  mile or so, until bending south it passed back  
among the hills  and disappeared from view.  Aragorn  rode  to  the Dike and 
watched till  the king's men  were far down  the  Coomb.  Then he turned  to 
Halbarad. 
     'There go three that I love, and the  smallest not the least,' he said. 
'He knows not to what end he rides; yet if he knew, he still would go on.' 
     'A  little  people,  but  of  great worth  are  the  Shire-folk,'  said 
Halbarad.  'Little do they  know of  our long  labour  for the safekeeping of 
their borders, and yet I grudge it not.' 
     'And now our fates are  woven together,' said Aragorn. 'And yet,  alas!  
here we must  part. Well, I must eat a little, and  then we also must hast en 
away. Come, Legolas and Gimli! I must speak with you as I eat.' 
     Together they went back into  the  Burg; yet for some  time Aragorn sat 
silent at  the  table in the  hall, and the others waited  for him to speak. 
'Come!'  said  Legolas  at last. 'Speak and be  comforted, and shake off the 
shadow! What has happened since we came  back to this grim place in the grey 
morning?' 
     'A  struggle  somewhat grimmer  for  my  part than  the  battle of  the 
Hornburg,' answered  Aragorn. 'I have  looked  in  the Stone of  Orthanc,  my  
friends.' 
     'You have  looked in that accursed stone of  wizardry!' exclaimed Gimli 
with  fear  and astonishment in his face. 'Did  you say aught to  - him? Even 

####-Gandalf feared that encounter.' 
     'You  forget  to whom  you speak,' said  Aragorn sternly, and his  eyes 
glinted. 'Did I not openly proclaim  my  title before  the doors  of Edoras?  
What do you fear that I should say to him? Nay, Gimli,' he said  in a softer  
voice,  and  the grimness left  his face, and  he looked   like  one who  has 
laboured  in sleepless pain for many nights.  'Nay, my  friends,  I  and the 
lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the right and the strength to use 
it, or so I judged. The right cannot be doubted.  The strength was  enough  - 
barely . ' 
     He drew a deep breath. 'It was  a bitter struggle, and the weariness is 
slow to pass. I spoke no word to him, and in the end I wrenched the Stone to 
my own  will. That alone he will find hard to endure. And he beheld me. Yes,  
Master Gimli, he saw me, but in other guise than you  see  me here. If  that 
will aid him, then I  have  done ill. But I do not think so. To  know that I 
lived  and walked the earth was a blow  to his heart, I deem; for he knew it 
not till now. The eyes in Orthanc did not see through the armour of Thjoden;  
but Sauron has not  forgotten Isildur and the  sword of  Elendil. Now in the 
very  hour  of  his  great  designs the  heir of  Isildur and the  Sword are 
revealed; for l showed the blade re-forged  to him. He is not so mighty   yet 
that he is above fear; nay, doubt ever gnaws him.' 
     'But he wields  great dominion, nonetheless,' said Gimli;  'and now  he 
will strike more swiftly.' 
     'The hasty  stroke  goes oft astray,' said Aragorn. 'We must press  our 
Enemy, and no longer wait upon him  for the move. See my friends, when I had 
mastered  the  Stone,  I  learned many things.  A grave peril I  saw  coming 
unlooked-for upon Gondor  from the  South that will  draw off great strength 
from the defence of Minas Tirith. If  it  is not countered  swiftly,  I deem 
that the City will be lost ere ten days be gone.' 
     'Then lost it must be,'  said Gimli. 'For  what  help is  there to send 
thither, and how could it come there in time?' 
     'I have  no help  to send,  therefore I must  go myself,'  said Aragorn. 
'But there is only one way through the mountains  that will  bring me to the 
coastlands before all is lost. That is the Paths of the Dead.' 
     'The Paths of the Dead!' said Gimli.  'It is a fell name; and little to 
the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a road and  
not perish? And even if you pass that way, what will so few avail to counter  
the strokes of Mordor?' 

####-     'The  living  have  never  used that  road  since  the  coming  of  the 
Rohirrim,' said Aragorn, 'for it is closed to  them.  But  in this dark hour 
the heir of Isildur may use  it, if he  dare. Listen! This is the word  that 
the sons of  Elrond bring  to  me  from their father in Rivendell, wisest in 
lore: Bid  Aragorn remember  the words  of the  seer,  and the Paths of  the 
Dead.' 
     'And what may be the words of the seer?' said Legolas.  
     "Thus spoke  Malbeth the  Seer,  in the days of  Arvedui,  last king at 
Fornost,' said Aragorn: 
     Over the land there lies a long shadow,  
     westward reaching wings of darkness. 
     The Tower trembles; to the tombs of kings 
     doom approaches. The Dead awaken; 
     for the hour is come for the oathbreakers; 
     at the Stone of Erech they shall stand again  
     and hear there a horn in the hills ringing. 
     Whose shall the horn be? Who shall call them 
     from the prey twilight, the forgotten people? 
     The heir of him to whom the oath they swore. 
     From the North shall he come, need shall drive him: 
     he shall pass the Door to the Paths of the Dead. 
     'Dark ways doubtless, said  Gimli, but no darker than these staves  are 
to me.' 
     'If you  would  understand them better, then I bid  you  come with me,' 
said Aragorn; 'for that way I now shall take. But I do  not go  gladly; only 
need drives me. Therefore, only of your free will would I have you come, for 
you will find both toil and great fear, and maybe worse.' 
     'I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever, end 
they may lead,' said Gimli. 
     'I also will come,' said Legolas, 'for I do not fear the Dead.' 
     'I  hope  that the  forgotten people  will  not have  forgotten how  to 
fight,' said Gimli; 'for otherwise I see not why we should trouble them.' 
     'That we shall know if ever  we come to Erech,' said  Aragorn. 'But the 
oath  that  they broke  was  to  fight  against Sauron, and they must  fight 
therefore,  if  they are to fulfil it. For at Erech there stands yet a black  
stone that was brought, it was said, from N®menor by Isildur; and it was set 
upon a hill, and  upon it  the King of the Mountains swore allegiance to him 

####-in  the beginning of the realm of Gondor. But when Sauron returned and  grew 
in might again, Isildur summoned the  Men of  the Mountains to  fulfil their 
oath, and they would not: for they had worshipped Sauron in the Dark Years. 
     'Then Isildur said to  their king: "Thou shalt be the last king. And if 
the West prove mightier than thy  Black Master, this curse  I  lay upon thee 
and thy folk: to rest never until your oath is  fulfilled. For this war will 
last through years uncounted, and you  shall be summoned once again ere  the 
end."  And they fled  before  the  wrath of  Isildur, and did not dare to go 
forth to war on  Sauron's  part; and they hid themselves in secret places in 
the mountains and had no dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the 
barren hills. And the  terror of the Sleepless Dead lies  about  the Hill of 
Erech and all places  where that people  lingered. But that  way I  must go, 
since there are none living to help me.' 
     He stood up.  'Come!' he  cried, and drew his sword, and it  flashed in 
the twilit hall of the Burg. 'To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths of the 
Dead. Come with me who will!' 
     Legolas  and Gimli  made no answer,  but they rose and followed Aragorn 
from the  hall.  On  the green  there waited,  still and silent, the  hooded 
Rangers.  Legolas  and Gimli  mounted.  Aragorn  sprang upon  Roheryn.  
Then 
Halbarad lifted a great horn, and the blast of it echoed in Helm's Deep; and 
with that they leapt away, riding down the Coomb like thunder, while all the 
men that were left on Dike or Burg stared in amaze. 
     And  while Thjoden  went  by slow paths in the hills, the Grey  Company 
passed  swiftly  over the plain, and on the next day  in the  afternoon they 
came to Edoras;  and there they halted only briefly, ere they passed up  the 
valley, and so came to Dunharrow as darkness fell. 
     The  Lady  Jowyn greeted  them  and  was  glad of  their coming; for no 
mightier men had she seen than the D®nedain and the fair sons of Elrond; but 
on Aragorn most of  all her eyes rested.  And when  they sat at supper  with 
her, they talked  together, and  she heard  of  all that  had  passed  since 
Thjoden rode away, concerning which only hasty tidings  had yet reached her; 
and when  she  heard of the battle in Helm's Deep and the great slaughter of 
their foes,  and of  the charge of  Thjoden and  his knights, then  her eyes 
shone. 
     But at last she said:  'Lords, you are weary and  shall now  go to  your 
beds  with  such ease  as can  be contrived in  haste.  But  tomorrow fairer  

####-housing shall be found for you.' 
     But Aragorn said:  'Nay, lady, be  not troubled  for  us! If we may lie 
here tonight and break our fast tomorrow, it  will be enough. For  I ride on 
an errand most urgent, and with the first light of morning we must go.' 
     She smiled  on him and said: 'Then it was kindly done, lord, to ride so 
many miles out of your  way to bring tidings to Jowyn, and to speak with her 
in her exile.' 
     'Indeed no man would count such a  journey  wasted,' said Aragorn; 'and 
yet, lady, I could not have come hither, if  it were not that the road which 
I must take leads me to Dunharrow.' 
     And she answered  as one  that likes not what is said: "Then, lord, you  
are astray; for out of  Harrowdale no road  runs east or south; and  you had 
best return as you came.' 
     'Nay, lady,' said  he, 'I am  not astray; for I walked in this land ere 
you were born to grace it. There is a road out of this valley, and that road 
I shall take. Tomorrow I shall ride by the Paths of the Dead.' 
     Then she stared at him as one that is stricken,  and her face blanched, 
and  for long she  spoke no more, while all sat silent. 'But, Aragorn,'  she 
said at last,  'is it  then your errand to  seek death? For that  is all that 
you will find on that road. They do not suffer the living to pass.' 
     'They may suffer me  to pass,' said Aragorn; 'but at the  least I  will 
adventure it. No other road will serve.' 
     'But  this  is  madness,' she  said.  'For  here are  men of renown and 
prowess, whom you should not take into the shadows, but  should lead to war, 
where men are needed. I beg you to remain and ride with my brother; for then 
all our hearts will be gladdened, and our hope be the brighter.' 
     'It is  not madness, lady,' he answered; 'for I go on a path appointed. 
But those who follow  me do so of  their free will; and if they wish now  to 
remain and ride  with the  Rohirrim,  they  may do so. But  I shall take the 
Paths of the Dead, alone, if needs be.' 
     Then they said no more, and they ate in silence; but her eyes were ever  
upon Aragorn, and the others  saw that she  was in great torment of mind. At  
length they arose, and took their leave of the Lady, and thanked her for her  
care, and went to their rest. 
     But as Aragorn came to the booth where he was to lodge with Legolas and 
Gimli, and  his companions had  gone in. there came the Lady Jowyn after him 
and called to him. He turned and saw her  as a glimmer in  the night, for she 

####-was clad in white; but her eyes were on fire. 
     'Aragorn,' she said, 'why will you go on this deadly road?' 
     'Because I must,' he said. 'Only so can I see any hope of doing my part 
in the war against Sauron. I do not choose paths of peril, Jowyn. Were I  to 
go where my  heart dwells, far  in the North I would now be wandering in the 
fair valley of Rivendell.' 
     For a while she was silent, as if pondering what this  might mean. Then 
suddenly she laid her hand on his arm. 'You are  a stern lord and resolute,' 
she said; 'and thus  do  men  win renown.' She paused. 'Lord.' she said, 'if 
you must go, then let me ride in your  following. For I am weary of skulking 
in the hills, and wish to face peril and battle.' 
     'Your duty is wi th your people,' he answered. 
     'Too often have I heard of duty,' she cried. 'But am I not of the House 
of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited on faltering feet 
long enough.  Since they falter no longer, it seems, may I not  now spend my 
life as I will?' 
     'Few may do that with honour,' he answered.  'But as for you, lady: did 
you not accept the charge to govern the people until their lord's return? If 
you had not been chosen, then some marshal or captain would have been set in 
the same place, and he could not ride away from his charge, were he weary of 
it or no.' 
     'Shall I always be chosen?' she  said bitterly. 'Shall I always be left  
behind when the Riders depart, to mind the house while they  win renown, and 
find food and beds when they return?' 
     'A time may come  soon,' said he, 'when none  will return.  Then  there 
will be need of valour  without  renown,  for none shall remember the  deeds 
that  are done in  the last defence of your homes. Yet the deeds will not be 
less valiant because they are unpraised.' 
     And she answered: 'All  your words are but to say: you are a woman, and 
your part is in the house. But when  the men have died in battle and honour,  
you have leave to  be burned in the house, for the men will need it no more. 
But I  am of the House of Eorl and not a serving-woman. I can ride and wield 
blade, and I do not fear either pain or death.' 
     'What do you fear, lady?' he asked. 
     'A cage,' she said. 'To stay behind bars, until use and old age  accept 
them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire.' 
     'And  yet you  counselled  me  not  to adventure on the road that I had 

####-chosen, because it is perilous?' 
     'So may one counsel another,' she said. 'Yet I do not bid you flee from  
peril, but to ride to battle where your sword may win renown and victory.  I 
would not see a thing that is high and excellent cast away needlessly.' 
     'Nor would I,' he  said. 'Therefore  I  say to you, lady: Stay! For you  
have no errand to the South.' 
     'Neither have those others who go with thee. They go  only because they 
would not be parted from thee  - because they love thee.' Then she turned and 
vanished into the night. 
     When the light of day was come into the  sky  but  the sun was  not yet 
risen above the high  ridges in the East,  Aragorn made ready to depart. His 
company was all mounted, and he was  about to leap into the saddle, when the 
Lady  Jowyn came to bid them farewell. She was clad as a Rider and girt with 
a sword. In her hand she bore a cup, and  she set it to her lips and drank a  
little, wishing them  good speed; and then she gave the cup to Aragorn,  and 
he drank, and he said:  'Farewell, Lady of Rohan! I drink to the fortunes of 
your House, and of you, and of all  your people. Say to your brother: beyond  
the shadows we may meet again!' 
     Then it seemed to Gimli  and Legolas who were nearby that she wept, and 
in one  so  stern and proud that seemed  the  more grievous.  But  she said: 
'Aragorn, wilt thou go?' 
     'I will,' he said. 
     'Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company, as I have asked?' 
     'I will not, lady,' he said. 'For that I  could not grant without leave 
of the king and  of  your brother; and they will not return until  tomorrow.  
But I count now every hour, indeed every minute. Farewell!' 
     Then she fell on her knees, saying: 'I beg thee!' 
     'Nay, lady,' he said, and taking her by the hand he raised her. Then he 
kissed her hand, and sprang into the saddle, and rode away, and did not look  
back; and only  those who knew  him well and were  near to him saw  the pain 
that he bore. 
     But Jowyn stood still as  a figure carven in stone,  her hands clenched 
at her sides, and she watched  them until they passed into the shadows under  
the  black Dwimorberg,  the Haunted Mountain, in which was  the Gate of  the 
Dead.  When they were lost  to view, she turned,  stumbling  as  one that is 
blind, and went back to her lodging. But none of her folk  saw this parting, 
for they hid themselves in fear and would not come forth until  the  day was 

####-up, and the reckless strangers were gone. 
     And some  said: 'They are Elvish wights. Let them go where they belong,  
into the dark places, and never return. The times are evil enough.' 
     The light was  still grey as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed 
over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before  them. A dread  fell on 
them, even as they passed between the lines of ancient stones and so came to 
the Dimholt.  There under the  gloom of  black  trees  that not even Legolas 
could long  endure they found a hollow place opening at the mountain's root, 
and right in their path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom. 
     'My blood runs chill,'  said Gimli, but the others were silent, and his 
voice fell dead on  the  dank fir-needles at his feet. The horses  would not 
pass the threatening stone, until the riders dismounted and led them  about. 
And so they came at last deep into the glen; and there stood a sheer wall of 
rock, and in  the wall the Dark  Door  gaped  before them like  the mouth of 
night.  Signs and figures were  carved above its  wide arch too dim to read, 
and fear flowed from it like a grey vapour. 
     The company halted, and there was  not a  heart among them that did not  
quail, unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for whom the ghosts 
of Men have no terror. 
     'This is an  evil door,' said Halbarad, 'and my death lies beyond it. I 
will dare to pass it nonetheless; but no horse will enter.' 
     'But  we must go  in,  and therefore  the horses  must  go  too,'  said 
Aragorn.  'For if ever  we  come  through this  darkness,  many  leagues lie 
beyond, and every hour  that is lost there will bring the triumph  of Sauron 
nearer. Follow me!' 
     Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will in that 
hour  that all the D®nedain and  their horses  followed him. And  indeed the 
love that the horses of the Rangers bore for their riders was  so great that 
they were willing  to face even the  terror  of the Door, if  their masters' 
hearts were steady as they walked beside them. But Arod, the horse of Rohan, 
refused  the  way, and he stood sweating and trembling  in a  fear  that was 
grievous to see. Then Legolas laid his hands on his eyes and sang some words 
that  went  soft in the  gloom, until he  suffered himself  to  be  led, and 
Legolas passed in. And there stood Gimli the Dwarf left all alone. 
     His knees shook,  and  he  was wroth  with himself.  'Here is  a  thing 
unheard of!' he said. 'An  Elf  will go underground and a  Dwarf  dare not!' 
With that he plunged in. But it seemed to him  that he dragged his feet like 

####-lead over the threshold; and at once a blindness  came  upon him,  even upon 
Gimli Gluin's son who had walked unafraid in many deep places of the world. 
     Aragorn  had  brought  torches from Dunharrow,  and  now he went  ahead 
bearing one  aloft; and Elladan with  another went  at the rear, and  Gimli, 
stumbling behind, strove to overtake him. He could  see nothing  but the dim 
flame  of the tor ches; but  if the company halted, there  seemed  an endless 
whisper of voices all about him, a murmur of words in no tongue  that he had 
ever heard before. 
     Nothing assailed  the  company  nor  withstood  their passage,  and yet 
steadily fear grew on the Dwarf as  he went on:  most of all because he knew 
now that there could be no  turning back; all the paths behind were thronged 
by an unseen host that followed in the dark. 
     So time unreckoned passed, until Gimli  saw a  sight that he  was  ever 
afterwards loth to recall. The road was  wide, as far as he could judge, but 
now the company came  suddenly  into a great empty space, and there  were no 
longer any walls upon either side. The dread  was  so  heavy on him  that he 
could  hardly walk. Away  to the  left  something glittered  in the gloom as 
Aragorn's  torch drew near.  Then Aragorn halted and  went  to look  what it  
might be. 
     'Does  he  feel no fear?' muttered the  Dwarf. 'In any other cave Gimli 
Gluin's son would have been  the first to run to the gleam of gold.  But not 
here! Let it lie!' 
     Nonetheless he drew near,  and saw Aragorn kneeling, while Elladan held 
aloft both torches. Before him were the bones of  a  mighty man. He had been 
clad  in  mail, and still his harness lay there  whole; for the cavern's air 
was as dry as dust, and his  hauberk  was gilded. His belt  was  of gold and 
garnets, and rich with gold was the helm upon his bony head face downward on 
the floor. He  had fallen  near the far  wall  of the cave, as now could  be 
seen, and before  him stood a  stony door closed fast: his finger -bones were 
still clawing at the cracks. A notched and broken sword lay by him, as if he 
had hewn at the rock in his last despair. 
     Aragorn did  not touch him, but after gazing silently for  a  while  he 
rose  and sighed. 'Hither  shall the flowers of  simbelmynl come never  unto 
world's  end,' he murmured. 'Nine mounds and seven there are now  green with 
grass, and through all the long years he has lain at the door that  he could 
not unlock. Whither does it lead? Why would he pass? None shall ever know!  
     'For that is not my errand!' he cried, turning back and speaking to the 

####-whispering darkness behind. 'Keep your hoards and your secrets hidden in the 
Accursed Years! Speed only we ask.  Let us pass, and then come! I summon 
you 
to the Stone of Erech!' 
     There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful than 
the whispers  before;  and  then  a chill  blast came in  which  the torches 
flickered and  went  out,  and could not be  rekindled.  Of  the  time  that 
followed, one hour  or many, Gimli remembered little. The others pressed on, 
but  he  was ever hindmost, pursued  by a groping horror that  seemed always 
just  about to seize  him; and a rumour came after him lik e the shadow-sound 
of many feet. He  stumbled  on until he  was  crawling  like a beast on  the 
ground and felt that he could endure no more: he  must either find an ending 
and escape or run back in madness to meet the following fear. 
     Suddenly he  heard the  tinkle of water, a sound hard and  clear  as  a  
stone falling into a dream of dark shadow. Light  grew, and lo! the  company 
passed  through another  gateway, high-arched and broad, and a rill  ran out 
beside  them;  and  beyond, going  steeply  down, was  a road between  sheer 
cliffs, knife-edged against the sky  far above.  So deep and narrow was that 
chasm  that  the sky was  dark, and in it small stars  glinted. Yet as Gimli 
after learned it was still two hours ere sunset of the day on which they had 
set out from Dunharrow; though for all that he could then tell it might have 
been twilight in some later year, or in some other world. 
     The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas. They 
rode 
in  file, and evening came on and a  deep blue  dusk; and still fear pursued 
them. Legolas turning to speak to Gimli looked back and the Dwarf saw before 
his face  the glitter in the Elf's  bright  eyes. Behind them rode  Elladan, 
last of the Company, but not the last of those that took the downward road. 
     'The  Dead are following,'  said Legolas. 'I  see shapes  of Men and of 
horses,  and  pale  banners  like   shreds   of   cloud,  and   spears  like 
winter -thickets on a misty night. The Dead are following.' 
     'Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned,' said Elladan. 
     The Company  came at last out of the ravine, as suddenly as it they had 
issued  from  a crack in a wall; and there  lay the uplands  of a great vale 
before them,  and the stream  beside them went down with a  cold  voice over 
many falls.  
     'Where  in Middle-earth are we?' said Gimli; and Elladan answered:  'We 

####-have descended  from the uprising of the Morthond, the long chill river that 
flows at last to the sea that washes the  walls of Dol Amroth. You  will not 
need to ask hereafter how comes its name: Blackroot men call it.' 
     The  Morthond Vale made a  great  bay that beat up  against  the  sheer  
southern faces of the  mountains. Its steep slopes were grass-grown; but all 
was grey in that  hour, for the  sun had gone, and  far below lights twinkled 
in the homes of Men. The vale was rich and many folk dwelt there. 
     Then without  turning  Aragorn  cried aloud so  that  all  could  hear: 
'Friends, forget your weariness! Ride now, ride!  We  must come to the Stone 
of Erech ere this day passes, and long still is the way.' So without looking 
back they rode  the mountain-fields, until they came to  a  bridge over  the 
growing torrent and found a road that went down into the land. 
     Lights went out in house  and hamlet as they came, and doors  were shut, 
and folk that were  afield cried in terror and ran  wild  like  hunted deer. 
Ever there rose the same cry in the gathering  night: 'The King of the Dead!  
The King of the Dead is come upon us!' 
     Bells  wer e ringing far  below, and all men  fled  before  the face  of 
Aragorn; but the Grey  Company in their haste rode like hunters, until their 
horses were stumbling  with weariness. And thus, just ere midnight, and in a  
darkness  as black as the caverns in the  mountains, they came at last to the 
Hill of Erech. 
     Long had the terror of  the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the empty 
fields about it. For upon  the  top stood  a  black stone, round  as a great 
globe,  the  height  of a man, though its  half  was buried  in the  ground. 
Unearthly it looked, as though it had fallen from the sky, as some believed; 
but those who remembered still the lore of Westernesse told that it had been 
brought out of the ruin of N®menor and there  set by Isildur at his landing . 
None of the people of the valley dared to approach it, nor would  they dwell  
near;  for  they said  that it was a trysting-place  of  the Shadow-men, and 
there  they would  gather in  times  of fear, thronging round  the Stone and 
whispering. 
     To tha t Stone  the Company came and halted in the  dead  of night. Then  
Elrohir gave to Aragorn a silver horn, and he blew upon it and  it seemed to 
those that stood near  that they heard a sound of answering  horns, as if it 
was  an echo in deep caves far away. No other sound they heard, and yet they 
were aware of a great host gathered  all about the hill on which they stood; 
and a chill wind like the breath of ghosts came down from the mountains. But 

####-Aragorn dismounted, and standing by the Stone he cried in a great voice: 
     'Oathbreakers, why have ye come?' 
     And a voice  was heard  out of the  night that answered him, as if from 
far away: 
     'To fulfil our oath and have peace.' 
     Then Aragorn said: 'The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir upon 
Anduin, and ye shall come after  me. And when all this land is clean  of the 
servants  of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulfilled, and ye shall have peace 
and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur's heir of Gondor.' 
     And with that he  bade Halbarad unfurl  the great standard which he had 
brought; and behold! it was black, and if  there was any device upon  it, it 
was hidden in the darkness. Then there was silence, and  not a whisper nor a  
sigh  was heard  again all the long  night.  The  Company camped  beside the 
Stone,  but  they slept little, because  of the dread  of  the Shadows  that 
hedged them round. 
     But when the dawn came, cold and pale, Aragorn rose at once, and he led  
the Company forth upon the journey of greatest haste and  weariness that any 
among them  had known, save he  alone, and only his will held them to go on. 
No  other mortal Men  could  have endured it, none but the  D®nedain  of the 
North, and with them Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves.  
     They  passed Tarlang's Neck and came  into Lamedon; and the Shadow 
Host 
pressed behind and  fear went on  before them,  until they  came to Calembel 
upon Ciril,  and the sun  went down like  blood behind Pinnath Gelin away in 
the West  behind them.  The township  and  the  fords  of  Ciril  they found 
deserted,  for many men had gone away to war, and all that were left fled to  
the hills at the  rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead. But the next 
day there  came no dawn, and the Grey Company passed on into the darkness 
of 
the Storm  of  Mordor and were lost  to  mortal sight; but the Dead followed 
them. 
 

####- 

Chapter 3. The Muster of Rohan 

 
 
     Now all roads were running together to  the  East to meet the coming of 
war and the onset of the Shadow. And even as Pippin  stood at the Great Gate 
of the City  and saw the Prince of Dol Amroth ride in with  his banners, the 
King of Rohan came down out of the hills. 
     Day  was waning. In  the last  rays  of the  sun  the Riders  cast long 
pointed shadows that went on before them. Darkness had already crept beneath 
the murmuring fir-woods that clothed the steep mountain-sides. The king rode 
now  slowly at the end  of  the day. Presently the  path turned round a huge 
bare  shoulder of rock and plunged into the  gloom  of  soft -sighing  trees.  
Down, down they went in a long winding file. When  at last they came  to the 
bottom of  the gorge they  found that evening had fallen in the deep places.  
The sun was gone. Twilight lay upon the waterfalls. 
     All day far below them a leaping stream had run down from the high pass 
behind, cleaving its narrow way between pine-clad  walls; and now  through a  
stony  gate it flowed out and passed into a wider vale. The Riders  followed 
it, and suddenly Harrowdale lay before  them, loud with  the noise of waters 
in the evening. There the white Snowbourn, joined by the lesser stream, went 
rushing, fuming on  the  stones,  down to Edoras and the green hills and the 
plains. Away to the right at the head of the great dale the mighty Starkhorn 
loomed up above its  vast buttresses swathed in cloud; but  its jagged peak, 
clothed in everlasting snow, gleamed far above the world, blue-shadowed upon 
the East, red-stained by the sunset in the West. 
     Merry looked out in wonder upon this strange country,  of which he  had 
heard many tales upon their long road.  It was a skyless world, in which his 
eye; through dim gulfs of shadowy  air, saw only ever-mounting slopes, great 
walls of  stone behind  great  walls, and  frowning precipices wreathed with 
mist.  He sat  for a moment half dreaming, listening to  the noise of water, 
the  whisper of dark trees, the crack of stone, and the vast waiting silence 
that brooded  behind all sound. He  loved  mountains,  or he had  loved  the 
thought of them marching  on the edge of  stories brought from far away;  but 
now he was borne down by the insupportable weight of Middle-earth. He 
longed 
to shut out the immensity in a quiet room by a fire. 
     He was very tired, for though they had  ridden slowly, they had  ridden 

####-with very  little  rest. Hour after  hour for nearly three weary days he had 
jogged  up  and down, over passes, and through long dales,  and  across many 
streams. Sometimes where the way  was  broader he  had ridden at  the king's 
side, not noticing that many  of the Riders smiled to see  the two together: 
the  hobbit  on his little shaggy grey pony,  and the Lord of  Rohan on  his 
great white horse. Then he had talked to Thjoden, telling him about his home 
and the doings of  the Shire-folk, or listening in turn to tales of the Mark 
and its  mighty  men of old.  But most of the time, especially  on this last 
day, Merry had ridden  by himself just behind the  king, saying nothing, and 
trying to understand the slow sonorous speech of Rohan that he heard the men 
behind him using. It was  a  language in which there seemed to be many words 
that he  knew, though spoken more richly and strongly than in the Shire, yet  
he could not piece the words together. At times some Rider would lift up his 
clear voice in stirring song,  and Merry felt his heart leap, though he  did 
not know what it was about. 
     All the  same  he had been lonely, and  never more so  than now at  the 
day's end.  He wondered where  in all this strange world  Pippin had got to; 
and what would become of Aragorn and Legolas and Gimli. Then suddenly 
like a 
cold touch on his heart he thought of Frodo and Sam. 'I am forgetting them!' 
he said  to himself reproachfully. 'And yet they are more important than all 
the  rest of us. And I  came to help them; but now  they must be hundreds of 
miles away, if they are still alive.' He shivered. 
     'Harrowdale at  last!' said Jomer. 'Our journey  is almost at  an end.' 
They halted. The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply. Only a glimpse,  
as  through a tall window, could be seen of the great valley in the gloaming 
below. A single small light could be seen twinkling by the river. 
     'This journey is over, maybe,' said Thjoden, 'but I have far yet to go. 
Last night the  moon was full, and in the morning I shall ride to Edoras  to 
the gathering of the Mark.' 
     'But if you would take my  counsel,'  said  Jomer  in a low voice, 'you  
would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.' 
     Thjoden smiled.  'Nay,  my son, for  so I will call you, speak  not the 
soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears!' He drew himself up and looked 
back 
at the long line of his men fading into the dusk behind. 'Long years  in the 
space of days it seems since I rode west;  but never  will I lean on a staff 

####-again. If the war is lost, what good will be my hiding in the hills? And  if 
it is won, what grief will it be, even if I fall, spending my last strength?  
But we will leave this now. Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow. One 
evening of peace at least is left us. Let us ride on! ' 
     In  the  deepening  dusk  they came  down  into  the  valley. Here  the 
Snowbourn flowed near  to the western walls of  the dale, and soon the  path 
led them to a ford where the shallow  waters murmured  loudly on the stones. 
The ford was guarded.   As the king approached many men sprang up out of  the 
shadow of the rocks; and when they saw the king they cried with glad voices:  
'Thjoden King! Thjoden King! The King of the Mark returns!' 
     Then one blew a long call on  a horn.  It  echoed in the  valley. Other  
horns answered it, and lights shone out across the river. 
     And suddenly  there  rose a great chorus of  trumpets from high  above, 
sounding from some hollow  place, as  it seemed, that gathered  their  notes 
into one voice and sent it rolling and beating on the walls of stone. 
     So the  King  of  the Mark came back  victorious  out  of the  West  to 
Dunharrow  beneath  the feet  of  the White  Mountains. There he  found  the 
remaining  strength  of  his people  already assembled; for as soon  as  his 
coming was known captains rode to  meet  him at  the ford,  bearing messages 
from Gandalf. D®nhere,  chieftain of  the  folk of Harrowdale, was at  their 
head. 
     'At dawn three  days ago,  lord,' he  said. 'Shadowfax came like a wind 
out of  the West to  Edoras, and Gandalf brought  tidings of your victory to 
gladden  our  hearts.  But  he  brought also  word from you  to  hasten  the 
gathering of the Riders. And then came the winged Shadow.' 
     'The winged Shadow?' said Thjoden. 'We saw it also, but that was in the 
dead of night before Gandalf left us.' 
     'Maybe, lord,' said D®nhere. 'Yet the same, or  another like to  it,  a  
flying darkness in  the shape of a  monstrous bird, passed  over Edoras that 
morning, and all men were  shaken with fear. For it  stooped  upon Meduseld, 
and  as it came low, almost to the gable,  there came a cry that stopped our 
hearts.  Then  it was that  Gandalf  counselled  us  not to  assemble in the 
fields, but to meet you here in the valley under the mounta ins. And  he bade 
us to kindle no more lights or fires than  barest need asked. So it has been 
done. Gandalf spoke with great authority. We trust that it is as  you  would 
wish. Naught has been seen in Harrowdale of these evil things.' 
     'It is well,' said Thjoden. 'I  will ride  now  to  the Hold, and there 

####-before  I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them come to 
me as soon as may be!' 
     The road now led eastward straight across the valley, which was at that 
point little more than half a mile in width. Flats and meads of rough grass,  
grey now in the falling night,  lay all about, but  in front on the far side 
of the dale Merry saw a frowning wall, a last outlier of the great  roots of 
the Starkhorn, cloven by the river in ages past . 
     On all the level spaces there was great concourse of men. Some thronged 
to the  roadside, hailing  the king and the riders  from the West with  glad 
cries; but stretching away into the distance behind there  were ordered rows 
of tents and booths, and lines of picketed horses,  and great store of arms, 
and piled spears bristling like  thickets of new-planted trees. Now  all the 
great assembly was falling into shadow, and yet, though the night -chill blew 
cold  from  the heights  no  lanterns  glowed, no fires  were  lit. Watchmen 
heavily cloaked paced to and fro. 
     Merry wondered  how many Riders there  were. He  could  not guess their 
number in the gathering gloom, but it  looked to him like a great army, many 
thousands strong. While  he was  peering from side  to side the king's party 
came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there 
suddenly the path began to climb, and Merry looked up in  amazement.  He 
was 
on a road the like of which he had never seen before,  a great work of men's 
hands in years beyond the  reach of  song. Upwards it wound, coiling  like a  
snake, boring its way across the  sheer slope of rock.  Steep as a stair, it 
looped  backwards and forwards as it  climbed. Up it horses  could walk, and 
wains  could be slowly hauled; but no  enemy could come that way, except out 
of the air,  if it was defended from above. At each turn  of the road  there 
were great standing stones that had been carved in the likeness of men, huge 
and clumsy-limbed, squatting cross-legged  with  their stumpy arms folded on 
fat bellies. Some in the wearing of the years had lost all features save the 
dark  holes of  their eyes that  still stared  sadly  at the passers-by. The 
Riders hardly glanced at them.  The  P®kel-men they  called them, and heeded 
them little:  no power or terror was left in them; but  Merry  gazed at them 
with wonder  and a feeling almost of pity,  as they loomed up  mournfully in 
the dusk. 
     After a while he looked back and found that he had already climbed some 
hundreds of feet  above the valley, but still far below he could dimly see a  

####-winding  line of Riders crossing the ford and filing along the  road towards 
the camp prepared for  them. Only the king  and his guard were going up into 
the Hold. 
     At last the king's company came to a sharp brink, and the climbing road 
passed into a cutting between walls of rock, and  so went  up a  short slope 
and  out  on  to a  wide  upland.  The  Firienfeld  men called it,  a  green 
mountain-field of grass and heath, high above the deep -delved courses of the 
Snowbourn,  laid upon the lap of the great mountains  behind:  the Starkhorn 
southwards, and northwards the saw-toothed mass of  Irensaga, between  which 
there faced the riders, the  grim black wall  of the Dwimorberg, the Haunted 
Mountain rising out of  steep slopes of  sombre  pines. Dividing the  upland 
into  two  there  marched  a double  line of unshaped standing  stones  that 
dwindled into the dusk and vanished in the  trees. Those who dared to follow 
that road came soon to the black Dimholt under Dwimorberg, and the menace 
of 
the pillar of stone, and the yawning shadow of the forbidden door. 
     Such was the dark Dunharrow, the work of long -forgotten men. Their name 
was lost and no song or legend remembered it. For what purpose they had 
made 
this place,  as a town  or secret temple or a tomb of kings, none could say. 
Here they laboured in the Dark Years, before ever a ship came to the western 
shores, or Gondor of the D®nedain was built; and now  they had vanished, and 
only the old P®kel -men were left, still sitting at the turnings of the road. 
     Merry stared at the lines of marching stones: they were worn and black; 
some  were  leaning, some were  fallen,  some cracked or broken; they looked 
like  rows  of old  and hungry teeth. He wondered what they could be, and he 
hoped  that the king was not going to follow  them into the darkness beyond.  
Then  he saw that there were  clusters of tents and booths on either side of 
the stony way; but these were not set near the  trees, and seemed rather  to 
huddle  away  from them towards the  brink of the  cliff. The greater number  
were on the right, where the Firienfeld was wider; and on the left there was 
a smaller camp, in the midst of which stood a  tall pavilion. From this side 
a rider now came out to meet them, and they turned from the road. 
     As  they drew near  Merry  saw  that  the rider was a  woman  with long 
braided hair gleaming  in the twilight,  yet she wore a helm and was clad to 
the waist like a warrior and girded with a sword. 
     'Hail,  Lord of  the  Mark!'  she  cried. 'My  heart  is  glad  at your 

####-returning.' 
     'And you, Jowyn,' said Thjoden, 'is all well with you?' 
     'All  is well,' she  answered; yet it  seemed to  Merry  that her voice 
belied her,  and he would have  thought that she had  been weeping, if  that 
could be believed of one so stern of face. 'All is well. It was a weary road 
for  the people to  take,  torn suddenly  from their homes.  There were hard 
words, for it is long since war  has driven  us from  the green fields;  but 
there have been no evil deeds.  All  is now ordered, as  you  see. And  your 
lodging is prepared for you; for I have had full tidings of you and knew the 
hour of your coming.' 
     'So Aragorn has come then,' said Jomer. 'Is he still here?' 
     'No, he is gone,' said Jowyn turning away and  looking at the mountains 
dark against the East and South. 
     'Whither did he go?' asked Jomer. 
     'I  do not  know,'  she answered.  'He  came at  night,  and rode  away 
yestermorn, ere the Sun had climbed over the mountain-tops. He is gone.' 
     'You are grieved, daughter,' said Thjoden. 'What has happened? Tell me, 
did  he speak  of  that road?' He pointed  away along the darkening lines of 
stones towards the Dwimorberg. 'Of the Paths of the Dead?' 
     'Yes, lord,' said Jowyn. 'And he has passed into the shadows from which 
none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.' 
     'Then our paths are sundered,' said  Jomer. 'He is  lost.  We must ride 
without him, and our hope dwindles.' 
     Slowly they  passed through the short heath and  upland grass, speaking 
no  more, until they  came to the king's pavilion.  There  Merry  found that 
everything  was made ready, and that he himself was not forgotten. A  little 
tent had been pitched for  him beside the king's  lodging; and there he  sat 
alone,  while men passed to and fro, going in to the king and taking counsel 
with him. Night came on, and the half-seen heads of  the mountains  westward 
were  crowned  with  stars, but the East was dark  and  blank.  The marching 
stones  faded slowly  from sight,  but still beyond them,  blacker than  the 
gloom, brooded the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg. 
     'The  Paths  of the Dead,'  he muttered to himself. 'The  Paths  of the 
Dead? What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They have all gone 
to some doom:  Gandalf and Pippin to  war in the East; and  Sam and Frodo to 
Mordor; and  Strider and  Legolas and Gimli to the Paths of the Dead. But my 
turn will come  soon enough, I suppose. I  wonder what they are all  talking 

####-about, and what the king means to do. For I must go where he goes now.' 
     In the midst of these  gloomy  thoughts  he suddenly remembered that he 
was very hungry, and he got  up to go and see if anyone else in this strange 
camp felt the  same.  But at  that very moment a trumpet sounded, and  a man 
came summoning him, the king's esquire, to wait at the king's board. 
     In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space, curtained off with 
broidered  hangings, and strewn  with skins:  and there at a small table sat 
Thjoden with Jomer and Jowyn, and D®nhere,  lord of  Harrowdale. Merry 
stood 
beside the king's stool and waited on him till presently the old man, coming 
out of deep thought, turned to him and smiled. 
     'Come, Master Meriadoc!'  he said. 'You shall  not stand. You shall sit 
beside me, as long  as I remain  in my own lands, and lighten my heart  with 
tales.' 
     Room was made for the hobbit at the king's left hand, but no one called 
for any tale. There was indeed little speech, and they ate and drank for the 
most  part in silence, until at last, plucking up courage,  Merry  asked the 
question that was tormenting him. 
     'Twice  now, lord, I have heard  of the  Paths of the  Dead,'  he  said. 
'What are  they? And where has Strider, I mean the Lord Aragorn where has he 
gone?' 
     The king sighed, but no one answered, until at last Jomer spoke. 'We do 
not know, and our hearts are heavy,' he  said. 'But as  for the Paths of the 
Dead, you have yourself walked on their  first steps. Nay. I speak no  words 
of  ill  omen! The road that  we have  climbed is  the approach to the Door, 
yonder in the Dimholt. But what lies beyond no man knows.' 
     'No man knows,' said  Thjoden:  'yet ancient legend, now seldom spoken,  
has  somewhat to  report. If these old  tales speak true that have come down 
from father to son in the House  of  Eorl, then  the  Door  under Dwimorberg 
leads to a  secret way that goes beneath the mountain to some forgotten end.  
But none  have ever  ventured in to search its secrets, since Baldor, son of 
Brego, passed the  Door  and was  never seen among men again. A rash  vow 
he 
spoke,  as he drained  the  horn  at that feast which  Brego made  to hallow 
new-built Meduseld,  and he came never to the  high seat of which he was the 
heir. 
     'Folk say that Dead Men  out of the Dark Years guard  the way  and will 

####-suffer no living man to come to their  hidden halls;  but at whiles they may 
themselves  be seen passing out of the door  like shadows and down  the stony 
road. Then the people of Harrowdale  shut fast  their doors and shroud their 
windows and are afraid. But the Dead come seldom forth and only  at times of 
great unquiet and coming death.' 
     'Yet it is said in Harrowdale,' said Jowyn in a low voice. 'that in the 
moonless nights but little  while ago  a great host in  strange array passed 
by. Whence they came none knew, but they went up the stony road and 
vanished 
into the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.' 
     'Then why  has Aragorn  gone that  way?'  asked Merry. 'Don't you  know 
anything that would explain it?' 
     'Unless  he has  spoken  words  to  you as his friend that we  have not 
heard,'  said  Jomer,  'none now  in  the land of the  living  can tell  his 
purpose.' 
     'Greatly  changed he seemed to  me since I saw him first  in the king's 
house,' said Jowyn: 'grimmer, older.  Fey I thought  him, and  like one whom 
the Dead call.' 
     'Maybe  he was called,' said  Thjoden;  'and my  heart  tells me that I 
shall  not see him again.  Yet he is a kingly man of high  destiny. And take 
comfort in this,  daughter, since comfort you seem to need in your grief for  
this guest.  It is said  that  when the Eorlingas  came out of the North and 
passed  at length up the  Snowbourn, seeking strong places of refuge in time 
of need, Brego and his son Baldor climbed the Stair of the  Hold and so came 
before  the Door.  On  the threshold sat an  old man, aged beyond  guess  of 
years; tall and kingly he had been, but now he was withered as an old stone.  
Indeed for stone they took him, for he moved not, and he said no word, until 
they sought to pass him  by and enter. And then a  voice came out of him, as 
it were out  of  the ground,  and  to  their amaze  it spoke in  the western 
tongue: The way is shut. 
     'Then they halted and looked at him and saw that he lived still; but he 
did not  look at them.  The way is shut, his voice said again It was made by 
those who  are Dead,  and the Dead keep it, until the time comes. The way is  
shut. 
     'And  when  will that time be? said Baldor. But  no answer  did he ever  
get. For the old man died in that hour  and fell upon his face; and no other  
tidings of the ancient dwellers in the mountains have our folk ever learned. 

####-Yet maybe at last the time foretold has come, and Aragorn may pass.' 
     'But how  shall a man discover whether that time be come or no, save by 
daring the Door?' said  Jomer. 'And that way  I would not go  though all the 
hosts of Mordor stood before me, and  I were alone and had no other  refuge. 
Alas that a fey mood should  fall  on a  man so greathearted in this hour of 
need! Are there not evil things enough abroad without seeking them under the 
earth? War is at hand.' 
     He  paused, for at that moment there was a noise outside, a man's voice 
crying the name of Thjoden, and the challenge of the guard. 
     Presently the captain of the Guard thrust aside the curtain. 'A  man is 
here, lord,' he  said, 'an errand-rider of Gondor. He wishes to come  before 
you at once.' 
     'Let him come!' said Thjoden. 
     A tall man entered, and Merry choked back a cry; for a moment it seemed 
to him that Boromir was alive  again and  had returned. Then he saw  that it 
was not so; the man was a stranger, though as like  to Boromir as if he were 
one of his kin, tall and grey-eyed  and proud. He was clad as a rider with a  
cloak of  dark  green over a coat of fine mail; on the front of his helm was 
wrought  a  small  silver  star.  In  his  hand  he  bore  a  single  arrow, 
black-feathered and barbed with steel, but the point was painted red. 
     He sank on one knee and  presented the  arrow to Thjoden. 'Hail Lord of 
the  Rohirrim, friend  of Gondor!' he said.  'Hirgon I  am,  errand-rider of 
Denethor,  who bring you this token  of  war. Gondor is in great need. Often 
the Rohirrim have  aided us,  but now the  Lord  Denethor asks for  all your 
strength and all your speed; lest Gondor fall at last.' 
     'The  Red  Arrow!' said  Thjoden, holding  it, as  one  who receives  a  
summons  long expected and  yet  dreadful  when it comes. His hand trembled. 
'The Red  Arrow has not been seen in the Mark in all my years! Has it indeed 
come  to that? And what does the Lord Denethor reckon that  all  my strength 
and all my speed may be?' 
     'That is best known  to yourself,  lord,' said Hirgon. 'But ere long it 
may  well come to pass that Minas Tirith is surrounded,  and unless you have 
the strength to  break a siege of many powers, the Lord Denethor bids me say 
that he judges that the  strong arms of the Rohirrim would  be better within 
his walls than without.' 
     'But he knows that we are a people  who fight rather upon horseback and 
in  the open, and that we are also a scattered people and time is needed for  

####-the gathering of our Riders.  Is it not true, Hirgon, that the Lord of Minas 
Tirith knows more than he sets in his message? For we are already at war, as 
you may have seen, and you do not find us all  unprepared. Gandalf the  Grey 
has been among us, and even now we are mustering for battle in the Ea st.' 
     'What  the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot  
say,' answered Hirgon. 'But indeed our  case is desperate. My  lord does not  
issue any command  to  you, he begs  you only to remember old friendship and 
oaths  long spoken, and  for your  own  good to do  all that you may. It  is 
reported to us that many kings have ridden in from the  East  to the service 
of Mordor. From the  North to  the field  of Dagorlad there is skirmish  and 
rumour of war. In the  South the Haradrim are moving, and fear has fallen on 
all our  coastlands, so that little help will come to us thence. Make haste! 
For it is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be 
decided,  and if the tide be not stemmed there, then  it will flow  over all 
the fair fields of Rohan, and even in this Hold among the hills  there shall 
be no refuge.' 
     'Dark  tidings,'  said Thjoden,  'yet  not  all  unguessed. But say  to 
Denethor that even if Rohan itself felt no peril, still we would come to his 
aid. But we have suffered much loss in our battles with Saruman the traitor, 
and we must  still  think of our frontier to the  north and east, as his own 
tidings make  clear.  So great a power as the  Dark Lord seems  now to wield 
might well  contain us in  battle before the City and yet  strike with great 
force across the River away beyond the Gate of Kings. 
     'But  we  will  speak no longer counsels of prudence. We will come. The 
weapontake was set for the morrow.  When all is ordered we will set out. Ten 
thousand spears I might  have sent  riding over  the plain to the dismay  of 
your foes. It will be less  now, I fear; for I will not leave my strongholds 
all unguarded. Yet six thousands at the  least shall ride behind me. For say 
to Denethor that in this hour the King of the Mark himself will come down to 
the land  of Gondor, though  maybe  he will not ride back. But it is a  long 
road, and man and beast must reach the end with strength to fight. A week it 
may be from tomorrow's morn  ere you hear the cry of the Sons of Eorl coming 
from the North. 
     'A week!' said Hirgon. 'If it must be so, it must. But you are like  to 
find  only  ruined  walls  in  seven  days  from  now,   unless  other  help 
unlooked-for comes. Still, you may at the least disturb the Orcs and Swarthy 
Men from their feasting in the White Tower.' 

####-     'At the least we will do that,' said Thjoden. 'But I myself am new-come 
from  battle and long  journey, and I will  now go to rest. Tarry here  this 
night. Then you shall  look on the muster of Rohan and ride away the gladder 
for  the sight, and the swifter for the  rest.  In the morning counsels  are 
best, and night changes many thoughts.  
     With  that the king stood up, and they all rose.  'Go  now each to your 
rest.'  he said, 'and  sleep well. And you, Master Meriadoc, I  need no more 
tonight. But be ready to my call as soon as the Sun is risen.' 
     'I will be ready,' said Merry, 'even if you bid me ride with you on the 
Paths of the Dead.' 
     'Speak not words  of omen!' said the k ing. 'For there may be more roads 
than one that could  bear  that name. But I did not say that I would bid you  
ride with me on any road. Good night!' 
     'I won't be left behind,  to be called for on return!'  said  Merry. 'I  
won't be  left, I won't.' And repeating this over and  over again to himself 
he fell asleep at last in his tent. 
     He  was  wakened by  a  man  shaking him.  'Wake up,  wake  up.  Master 
Holbytla!' he cried; and at length Merry came out of  deep dreams and sat up 
with a start. It still seemed very dark, he thought. 
     'What is the matter?' he asked. 
     'The king calls for you.' 
     'But the Sun has not risen, yet,' said Merry. 
     'No, and will not rise  today,  Master Holbytla. Nor  ever  again,  one 
would think under this cloud. But time  does not stand still, though the Sun 
be lost. Make haste!' 
     Flinging on some clothes, Merry looked outside. The world was darkling. 
The very air seemed brown, and  all things  about were  black  and grey  and 
shadowless; there was  a great stillness. No shape  of cloud could be  seen, 
unless it were far away  westward, where the furthest groping fingers of the 
great gloom  still crawled  onwards  and a little light leaked through them. 
Overhead there hung a heavy  roof, sombre and  featureless, and light seemed 
rather to be failing than growing. 
     Merry saw many folk standing, looking up and muttering: all their faces 
were grey and sad, and some  were afraid. With a sinking heart  he made  his 
way to the king. Hirgon the rider of Gondor  was there before him, and beside 
him  stood now another man, like  him and  dressed alike,  but  shorter  and 
broader. As Merry entered he was speaking to the king. 

####-     'It comes from Mordor,  lord,' he said. 'It began last night at sunset. 
From the hills in the Eastfold of your realm I saw it rise  and creep across 
the sky, and all night as I rode it came behind eating up the stars. Now the 
great cloud hangs  over all  the  land between  here  and  the Mountains  of 
Shadow; and it is deepening. War has a lready begun.' 
     For a while the king sat silent. At last he spoke. 'So we come to it in 
the end,' he said: 'the great battle of our time, in which many things shall 
pass away. But at least there is no longer need for hiding. We will ride the 
straight  way  and  the  open road and with all our  speed. The muster shall 
begin  at once, and wait for none that tarry. Have  you good  store in Minas 
Tirith? For if we must ride now in all haste, then we must  ride light, with 
but meal and water enough to last u s into battle.' 
     'We have very great store long prepared,' answered  Hirgon. Ride now as 
light and as swift as you may!' 
     'Then call  the  heralds,  Jomer,' said  Thjoden. 'Let  the  Riders  be 
marshalled!' 
     Jomer  went out, and presently  the trumpets rang  in the Hold and were 
answered by many others from below; but their voices no longer sounded clear 
and brave as they had seemed to Merry the night before. Dull they seemed and 
harsh in the heavy air, braying ominously. 
     The  king  turned to Merry. 'I am going  to  war,  Master Meriadoc,' he 
said.  'In  a  little while I shall take  the  road.  I release you from  my 
service, but not from my friendship.  You shall abide here, and if you will, 
you shall serve the Lady Jowyn, who will govern the folk in my stead.' 
     'But, but, lord,' Merry  stammered, 'I offered you my sword.  I do  not 
want  to be parted  from you like this, Thjoden King. And as all my  friends 
have gone to the battle' I should be ashamed to stay behind.' 
     'But we ride on horses tall and swift,' said Thjoden; 'and great though 
your heart be, you cannot ride on such beasts.' 
     'Then tie me on  to the back of one,  or let me hang  on a  stirrup, or  
something,' said Merry. 'It  is a long way to  run; but  run  I shall, if  I 
cannot ride, even if I wear my feet off and arrive weeks too late.' 
     Thjoden smiled.  'Rather  than  that  I  would  bear  you  with  me  on 
Snowmane,'  he said. 'But at the least you shall ride with me to  Edoras and 
look on Meduseld;  for that way I  shall go. So far Stybba can bear you: the 
great race will not begin till we reach the plains.' 
     Then Jowyn rose  up. 'Come now,  Meriadoc!' she said. 'I will show  you  

####-the gear that  I have  prepared  fur  you.' They  went out  together.  'This 
request only did  Aragorn make to me,' said Jowyn, as  they passed among the 
tents, 'that you should be armed for battle. I have  granted it, as I could. 
For my heart tells me that you will need such gear ere the end.' 
     Now she led Merry to a booth among the lodges of the king's  guard  and 
there an armourer brought out to her a  small  helm, and a round shield, and 
other gear. 
     'No mail have we to fit you,' said Jowyn, 'nor any time for the forging 
of such a hauberk; but here is also a stout jerkin of leather, a belt, and a  
knife. A sword you have.' 
     Merry bowed,  and  the lady showed  him  the shield, which was like the 
shield that had  been given  to Gimli, and  it bore on  it the device of the 
white horse. 'Take  all  these things,' she  said, 'and  bear  them  to good 
fortune! Farewell now, Master  Meriadoc! Yet maybe we  shall meet again, you  
and I.' 
     So  it was that amid a  gathering gloom the King of the Mark made ready 
to lead  all  his  Riders on  the eastward road. Hearts were heavy  and  many 
quailed  in the shadow. But they were  a stern people, loyal to  their lord, 
and  little weeping or  murmuring was heard, even in  the  camp in  the Hold 
where the exiles from Edoras  were housed, women and children  and old  men. 
Doom hung over  them, but they faced it silently. 
     Two  swift hours passed, and now the king  sat  upon  his  white horse, 
glimmering in the half light. Proud and tall he seemed, though the hair that 
flowed beneath his high helm was  like  snow; and  many marvelled a t him and 
took heart to see him unbent and unafraid. 
     There on the wide  flats beside the noisy river were marshalled in many 
companies well nigh five and fifty  hundreds of Riders fully armed, and many 
hundreds of other men  with spare  horses lightly burdened. A single trumpet 
sounded. The king raised his  hand, and then silently  the host  of the Mark 
began to  move. Foremost went twelve of the king's household-men,  Riders of 
renown. Then the king followed with Jomer on his right. He had said farewell 
to Jowyn above in  the Hold, and the  memory was grievous; but now he turned 
his mind to the  road that lay ahead. Behind him Merry  rode  on Stybba with 
the errand riders of Gondor, and behind them again twelve more of the king's 
household. They passed  down  the long ranks of  waiting  men with stern  and 
unmoved faces.  But when they had  come  almost  to the end of  the line one 
looked up  glancing  keenly at the hobbit. A young man,  Merry thought as he 

####-returned the glance, less in height and girth than most. He caught the glint 
of clear grey eyes; and then he  shivered, for  it came suddenly to him that 
it was the face of one without hope who goes in search of death. 
     On  down  the grey road they went beside  the  Snowbourn rushing on its 
stones; through the hamlets of Underharrow and Upbourn, where many sad 
faces 
of women looked out from dark doors; and so without horn or harp or music of 
men's voices the great  ride into the East  began with  which  the songs  of 
Rohan were busy for many long lives of men thereafter. 
     From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning 
     with thane and captain rode Thengel's son: 
     to Edoras he came, the ancient halls 
     of the Mark-wardens mist-enshrouded; 
     golden timbers were in gloom mantled. 
     Farewell he bade to his free people, 
     hearth and high-seat, and the hallowed places, 
     where long he had feasted ere the light faded. 
     Forth rode the king, fear behind him, 
     fate before him. Fealty kept he; 
     oaths he had taken, all fulfilled them. 
     Forth rode Thjoden. Five nights and days 
     east and onward rode the Eorlingas 
     through Folde and Fenmarch and the Firienwood, 
     six thousand spears to Sunlending, 
     Mundburg the mighty under Mindolluin, 
     Sea-kings' city in the South -kingdom 
     foe-beleaguered, fire-encircled. 
     Doom drove them on. Darkness took them, 
     Horse and horseman; hoofbeats afar 
     sank into silence: so the songs tell us. 
     It was indeed in deepening gloom that the king came to Edoras, although 
it  was then but noon by the  hour. There  he halted only  a short while and 
strengthened his host by some three  score  of Riders that  came late to the 
weapontake. Now having eaten he made ready to set out  again, and  he wished 
his esquire  a kindly farewell. But Merry begged for the last time not to be 
parted from him. 
     'This is no journey for  such steeds  as  Stybba,  as I have told you ' 

####-said  Thjoden.  'And  in such a battle as we think to  make on the fields of 
Gondor what  would  you do, Master   Meriadoc, sword-thain though you be, 
and 
greater of heart than of stature?' 
     'As  for that,  who can tell?' answered Merry. 'But why, lord,  did you  
receive me as sword-thain, if not to stay by your side? And I would not have 
it said of me in song only that I was always left behind!' 
     'I  received you for your safe-keeping,' answered Thjoden; 'and also to 
do  as I might bid. None of my Riders can  bear you as burden. If the battle 
were before my gates, maybe your deeds would be remembered by the 
minstrels; 
but it  is a  hundred leagues and two to Mundburg  where Denethor is lord. I  
will say no more.' 
     Merry  bowed and  went  away  unhappily,  and  stared  at the lines  of 
horsemen. Already the companies were preparing to start: men were tightening 
girths, looking  to saddles, caressing their horses; some gazed uneasily  at 
the lowering sky. Unnoticed a Rider came up and spoke softly in the hobbit's 
ear. 
     'Where will wants not, a way opens, so we say,' he whispered; 'and so I 
have found myself.' Merry looked up and saw that it was the young Rider 
whom 
he had  noticed in the morning. 'You wish to go whither the Lord of the Mark 
goes: I see it in your face.' 
     'I do,' said Merry. 
     'Then you  shall go with me,'  said the Rider. 'I will bear  you before 
me, under my cloak until we are far afield, and this darkness is yet darker. 
Such good will should not be denied. Say no more to any man, but come!' 
     'Thank you indeed!' said Merry. 'Thank you, sir, though I  do not  know 
your name.' 
     'Do you not?' said the Rider softly. 'Then call me Dernhelm.' 
     Thus it  came to pass that  when the  king set out, before Dernhelm sat 
Meriadoc the hobbit, and the great  grey steed  Windfola  made little of the 
burden; for Dernhelm  was  less in  weight than many men, though  lithe  and 
well-knit in frame. 
     On  into the shadow they  rode. In  the willow-thickets where Snowbourn 
flowed into Entwash, twelve leagues east of Edoras,  they camped that night. 
And  then on  again  through the Folde; and through  the  Fenmarch, where to 

####-their  right great  oakwoods climbed on the skirts of the  hills  under  the 
shades of dark Halifirien by the borders of Gondor; but  away  to their left  
the mists lay on the marshes fed by the mouths of Entwash. And as they  rode 
rumour came of war in the North. Lone men, riding wild, brought word of foes 
assailing their east -borders, of orc-hosts marching in the Wold of Rohan. 
     'Ride on! Ride on!'  cried Jomer. 'Too late now to turn aside. The fens 
of Entwash must guard our flank. Haste now we need. Ride on!' 
     And  so King Thjoden departed from his own realm, and mile  by mile the 
long  road  wound  away,  and  the  beacon  hills  marched  past:  Calenhad, 
Min-Rimmon, Erelas, Nardol. But  their fires  were  quenched. All  the lands 
were grey and still;  and  ever the shadow  deepened before them,  and  hope  
waned in every heart. 
 

####- 

Chapter 4. The Siege of Gondor 

 
 
     Pippin was  roused by Gandalf. Candles  were lit in their chamber,  for  
only  a dim  twilight came  through the  windows; the air  was  heavy as with 
approaching thunder. 
     'What is the time?' said Pippin yawning. 
     'Past the second hour,' said Gandalf. 'Time to get up and make yourself 
presentable.  You  are summoned to  the Lord  of the City to learn your  new 
duties.' 
     'And will he provide breakfast?' 
     'No! I have provided  it: all that you will get till noon. Food  is now 
doled out by order.' 
     Pippin  looked  ruefully  at  the  small  loaf  and  (he  thought) very 
inadequate  pat of   butter which was set out for him,  beside  a cup of thin 
milk.  'Why did you bring me here?' he said. 
     'You know quite well,' said Gandalf. 'To keep you out  of mischief; and 
if you do  not  like being here, you can remember  that  you  brought it  on 
yourself.' Pippin said no more. 
     Before  long  he was  walking  with  Gandalf  once  more down  the cold  
corridor to the  door of the Tower Hall. There Denethor sat in a grey gloom,  
like an old patient spider, Pippin  thought: he  did not seem  to have moved 
since the day before. He beckoned Gandalf to a seat, but Pippin was left for  
a while standing unheeded. Presently the old man turned to him: 
     'Well, Master Peregrin,  I hope that you used yesterday to your profit, 
and to your liking? Though  I fear that the board is barer in this city than 
you could wish.' 
     Pippin had  an uncomfortable feeling that most  of what he had said  or  
done was somehow known to the Lord of the City, and much was guessed of 
what 
he thought as well. He did not answer. 
     'What would you do in my service?' 
     'I thought, sir, that you would tell me my duties.' 
     'I will, when I learn what you are fit for,' said Denethor. 'But that I 
shall learn soonest,  maybe,  if  I  keep you beside  me. The esquire of  my 
chamber  has begged leave to  go to the out-garrison, so  you shall take his 

####-place for a while. You shall wait  on me, bear errands,  and talk to me,  if 
war and council leave me any leisure. Can you sing?' 
     'Yes,' said Pippin.  'Well, yes, well enough for my  own people. But we 
have no songs  fit for  great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom  sing of 
anything more terrible  than wind  or rain. And most  of  my songs are about 
things that make us laugh; or about food and drink, of course.' 
     'And why should such songs be unfit for my halls, or for such  hours as 
these? We who have lived long under the  Shadow may surely listen to  echoes 
from  a land  untroubled  by  it? Then we may  feel that our  vigil was  not 
fruitless, though it may have been thank less.' 
     Pippin's heart sank. He did not  relish the idea of singing any song of 
the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic  ones that he 
knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an  occasion. He was however 
spared the ordeal  for  the present. He  was not commanded  to sing. Denethor 
turned to Gandalf, asking questions about  the Rohirrim and  their policies,  
and the position of Jomer, the king's nephew. Pippin marvelled at the amount 
that the Lord seemed to  know about a people that  lived far away, though it  
must, he thought, be many years since Denethor himself had ridden abroad. 
     Presently Denethor waved to Pippin and dismissed him again for a while. 
'Go to the armouries of the Citadel,' he said, 'and get you there the livery 
and gear of the  Tower. It will be ready. It was commanded yesterday. Return 
when you are clad!' 
     It was  as he said; and Pippin soon  found himself  arrayed in  strange 
garments, all of black and silver. He  had a small hauberk, its rings forged 
of steel,  maybe,  yet black  as  jet; and a high-crowned  helm  with  small 
raven-wings on  either  side, set with  a  silver star in the centre of  the 
circlet.  Above the mail was a short surcoat  of black, but broidered on the 
breast in silver with the token of the Tree. His old clothes were folded and 
put away, but he was permitted to  keep the grey cloak of Lurien, though not  
to wear it  when  on duty.  He looked now, had he  known it, verily Ernil  i 
Pheriannath , the Prince of  the Halflings, that folk had  called him; but he 
felt uncomfortable. And the gloom began to weigh on his spirits.  
     It  was  dark and dim all day. From the sunless dawn until evening  the 
heavy shadow  had deepened,  and all hearts in the City were oppressed.  Far 
above  a great cloud streamed slowly westward from the Black Land, 
devouring 
light, borne upon a wind of war; but below the air was still and breathless,  

####-as if all the Vale of Anduin waited for the onset of a ruinous storm. 
     About  the eleventh hour, released  at  last for  a while from service. 
Pippin came  out and  went  in search  of food and  drink to cheer his heavy 
heart  and make his task of waiting more  supportable. In  the messes he met 
Beregond again, who  had just  come from an errand over the Pelennor  out to 
the Guard-towers upon the Causeway. Together they strolled out to the walls;  
for  Pippin felt imprisoned indoors, and stifled even in the  lofty citadel. 
Now  they sat  side by side again  in the embrasure  looking eastward, where 
they had eaten and talked the day before. 
     It was the sunset-hour, but  the great pall had  now stretched far into 
the  West, and  only  as it sank at last into the Sea did the Sun escape  to 
send  out a brief farewell  gleam before  the night, even as Frodo saw it a t 
the Cross-roads touching the head of the fallen king. But  to  the fields of 
the Pelennor, under the shadow of Mindolluin, there came no gleam: they were 
brown and drear. 
     Already it  seemed years to  Pippin  since he had sat  there before, in 
some half-forgotten time when he had still  been a hobbit,  a  light-hearted 
wanderer touched little by the perils he had passed through. Now  he was one 
small soldier in a city preparing for a great assault, clad in the proud but 
sombre manner of the Tower of Guard. 
     In some  other time and place Pippin  might have been pleased with  his 
new array,  but he knew  now  that he was taking part in no  play; he was in 
deadly  earnest the servant of  a grim  master  in the  greatest  peril. The 
hauberk was burdensome, and the helm weighed upon his head. His cloak he 
had 
cast aside  upon the seat. He turned his tired  gaze away from  the darkling 
fields below and yawned, and then he sighed. 
     'You are weary of this day?' said Beregond. 
     'Yes,'  said Pippin,  'very: tired out with idleness and waiting. I have 
kicked my  heels  at the door of my master's  chamber  for many  slow hours, 
while  he  has  debated with Gandalf and the Prince and other great persons.  
And I'm not  used,  Master Beregond, to waiting hungry on others while  they 
eat. It is a sore trial for a hobbit, that. No doubt you will think I should 
feel the honour more  deeply. But  what is the good  of such honour?  Indeed 
what is the  good even of  food  and  drink under this creeping shadow? What 
does it  mean?  The very air seems thick and brown! Do  you often  have such 
glooms when the wind is in the East?' 

####-     'Nay,'  said  Beregond, 'this is no weather of the world. This  is some 
device  of his  malice; some broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that he 
sends  to darken hearts and counsel. And so it doth indeed. I wish the  Lord 
Faramir would  return. He  would not be dismayed. But now,  who  knows if he 
will ever come back across the River out of the Darkness?' 
     'Yes,' said Pippin, 'Gandalf, too, is anxious.  He was disappointed.  I 
think, not  to  find Faramir here. And where has he  got to himself? He left 
the  Lord's council before the noon -meal,  and  in  no good  mood either,  I 
thought. Perhaps he has some foreboding of bad news.' 
     Suddenly as they talked  they were  stricken dumb, frozen as it were to 
listening  stones. Pippin cowered down  with his hands pressed to his  ears;  
but Beregond, who  had been  looking out from the battlement  as he spoke of 
Faramir, remained  there, stiffened, staring  out with starting eyes. Pippin 
knew the shuddering cry that he had heard: it was the same that he had heard 
long  ago  in  the Marish  of the Shire, but now it was grown  in  power and 
hatred, piercing the heart with a poisonous despair . 
     At last Beregond spoke with an effort. 'They have come!' he said. 'Take 
courage and look! There are fell things below.' 
     Reluctantly Pippin climbed on to the seat and looked out over the wall. 
The Pelennor lay dim  beneath him, fading away to the scarce guessed line of 
the  Great  River. But  now  wheeling  swiftly across  it,  like  shadows of 
untimely  night, he  saw in  the middle airs  below him five birdlike forms, 
horrible as carrion-fowl  yet greater than  eagles, cruel as death. Now they 
swooped near, venturing almost within bowshot of the walls, now they circled 
away. 
     'Black Riders!'  muttered Pippin.  'Black  Riders  of the air! But see, 
Beregond!' he cried. 'They are  looking for something, surely? See  how they 
wheel and swoop,  always down to that  point over  there!  And  can  you see 
something moving on the ground? Dark little things. Yes, men on horses: four 
or five. Ah! I cannot stand it! Gandalf! Gandalf save us!' 
     Another  long screech rose and fell,  and  he threw  himself back again 
from the  wall, panting like  a  hunted  animal.  Faint and seemingly remote 
through that shuddering cry he  heard  winding  up from below the sound of a 
trumpet ending on a long high note. 
     'Faramir!  The  Lord Faramir! It is  his call!' cried  Beregond. 'Brave 
heart! But how can he win to the  Gate, if these  foul hell-hawks have other  
weapons than fear? But look! They hold on. They will make the Gate.  No! the 

####-horses are running mad. Look! the men are thrown; they are running  on foot. 
No,  one is  still  up, but he  rides  back to the others. That will be  the 
Captain: he can master both beasts and men. Ah! there one of the foul things 
is stooping on him. Help! help! Will no one go out to him? Faramir!' 
     With  that Beregond sprang  away  and ran off into the gloom. Ashamed of 
his terror, while Beregond of the Guard thought first of the captain whom he 
loved,  Pippin got up and peered out.  At that  moment he caught  a flash of 
white and silver coming from the  North, like a small star down on the dusky 
fields. It moved with the speed of an arrow and grew as it came,  converging  
swiftly with  the flight of  the four men  towards the  Gate.  It seemed  to 
Pippin that a  pale light was spread about it and the heavy shadows gave way 
before it; and then as  it drew near he thought that he heard, like  an echo 
in the walls, a great voice calling. 
     'Gandalf!' he  cried. 'Gandalf!  He always  turns  up  when things  are 
darkest.  Go on!  Go on,  White Rider! Gandalf, Gandalf!' he shouted wildly, 
like  an  onlooker  at  a  great race urging on a runner who is  far  beyond 
encouragement. 
     But now  the dark  swooping shadows  were  aware  of  the newcomer. One 
wheeled towards  him; but it seemed to Pippin that he raised  his hand,  and 
from  it a  shaft of  white light  stabbed upwards.  The Nazgyl  gave a long 
wailing  cry  and swerved away; and with  that the  four others wavered, and 
then rising in swift spirals they  passed away  eastward  vanishing into the 
lowering cloud  above; and down  on the Pelennor it seemed for a  while less 
dark. 
     Pippin watched,  and he  saw the  horseman and the White Rider meet and 
halt, waiting for those on foot. Men now hurried out to them from the  City;  
and soon they all passed from sight under the  outer walls, and he knew that 
they were  entering the Gate. Guessing  that they would  come at once to the 
Tower and the Steward, he  hurried to the entrance of the citadel.  There he 
was  joined by  many others who had watched the race and the rescue from the 
high walls.  
     It was not long before a clamour  was heard  in the streets leading  up 
from the outer circles, and there was much cheering and crying of  the names 
of Faramir  and Mithrandir. Presently Pippin saw torches, and followed by  a 
press of people two horsemen riding slowly:  one was in white but shining no 
longer, pale in the twilight as if his  fire was spent  or veiled; the other  
was dark  and his  head  was  bowed.  They  dismounted, and  as  grooms took  

####-Shadowfax and the  other  horse,  they walked forward to the sentinel at the 
gate: Gandalf  steadily,  his  grey  cloak  flung  back,  and  a fire  still 
smouldering in his eyes; the  other,  clad all in green, slowly,  swaying  a  
little as a weary or a wounded man. 
     Pippin pressed  forward  as  they passed  under the  lamp  beneath  the 
gate-arch, and when he saw the pale face of Faramir he caught his breath. It  
was the face  of one who has been assailed by a great fear  or anguish,  but 
has  mastered it and now is quiet. Proud and grave he stood for  a moment as 
he spoke to the guard, and Pippin gazing at him saw how closely he resembled 
his brother  Boromir - whom Pippin had liked from  the  first,  admiring the 
great man's lordly but kindly manner. Yet suddenly for Faramir his heart was 
strangely moved with a feeling that  he had  not known before. Here was  one 
with  an  air of high nobility such as  Aragorn at times revealed, less high 
perhaps, yet also less incalculable and remote: one of the Kings of Men born 
into a  later time,  but touched with the  wisdom  and sadness of  the Elder  
Race. He knew  now  why Beregond spoke his name with love. He was a  
captain 
that  men would follow, that he would follow, even under  the shadow  of the 
black wings. 
     'Faramir!'  he  cried aloud  with the others.  'Faramir!'  And  Faramir 
catching his strange voice among the clamour  of the men of the City, turned  
and looked down at him and was amazed. 
     'Whence  come  you?'  he said. 'A halfling,  and in the  livery  of the 
Tower! Whence...? ' 
     But  with that Gandalf stepped  to his side and spoke. 'He came with me 
from  the land of the Halflings,' he said. 'He came with  me. But let us not 
tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you are weary. He shall come 
with  us. Indeed  he  must,  for if he  does not forget his new  duties more 
easily than I do, he must attend on his  lord  again within this hour. Come, 
Pippin, follow us!' 
     So at length they came to the private chamber of the Lord of the  City. 
There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal; and wine was brought; 
and there Pippin,  hardly noticed, stood behind  the  chair of Denethor  and 
felt his weariness little, so eagerly did he listen to all that was said. 
     When Faramir had  taken white bread and drunk a draught of wine, he sat 
upon a low chair  at his father's left hand. Removed a little upon the other  
side sat Gandalf in a  chair of  carven  wood; and he seemed  at first to be 

####-asleep. For at the beginning Faramir spoke only of the errand  upon which he 
had been sent out ten days before, and he brought tidings of Ithilien and of 
movements of the Enemy and his allies; and he told of the  fight on the road 
when  the  men of Harad  and their  great beast were overthrown:  a  captain 
reporting  to his master  such matters as had often been heard before, small 
things of  border -war that  now seemed useless  and  petty,  shorn of  their 
renown. 
     Then suddenly  Faramir looked at Pippin. 'But now  we  come  to strange  
matters,' he said.  'For this  is not the first  halfling that  I  have seen 
walking out of northern legends into the Southlands.' 
     At that Gandalf sat up and gripped the arms of his chair;  but  he said 
nothing, and  with a look stopped the exclamation on Pippin's lips. Denethor  
looked at their faces  and  nodded his head, as though  in sign  that he had 
read much  there before it  was spoken. Slowly, while the  others sat silent 
and  still,  Faramir  told  his tale, with  his  eyes  for the most part  on 
Gandalf, though now and again his glance strayed to Pippin, as if to refresh 
his memory of others that he had seen. 
     As his story was unfolded of his meeting with Frodo and his servant and 
of  the events  at Henneth  Annyn, Pippin became aware that  Gandalf's hands 
were  trembling as they clutched the carven wood. White they seemed now  
and 
very old,  and as  he looked at them,  suddenly with a thrill of fear Pippin 
knew  that Gandalf, Gandalf himself, was troubled, even afraid.  The  air of 
the room was close and still. At last when Faramir spoke of his parting with  
the travellers, and of their resolve to go to Cirith Ungol,  his voice fell, 
and he shook his head and sighed. Then Gandalf sprang up. 
     'Cirith Ungol?  Morgul Vale?'  he said. 'The  time,  Faramir, the time?  
When did you part with them? When would they reach that accursed valley?' 
     'I parted with them in  the morning two days ago,' said Faramir. 'It is 
fifteen leagues thence to the vale  of the Morgulduin, if they went straight 
south; and then they would  be  still five leagu es westward of  the accursed 
Tower.  At  swiftest they could not come  there before today, and maybe they 
have not come there yet. Indeed I see what you fear. But the darkness is not 
due to their venture.  It began yestereve, and all Ithilien was under sha dow 
last night.  It is clear to me that the Enemy has long planned an assault on 
us, and its hour had already been determined before ever the travellers left 
my keeping.' 

####-     Gandalf paced the floor. 'The  morning  of two days ago,  nigh on three 
days of journey! How far is the place where you parted?' 
     'Some  twenty-five leagues as a  bird flies,' answered  Faramir. 'But I 
could not  come more swiftly.  Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long isle 
in the River  northward which we hold in defence; and horses are kept on the 
hither bank. As the dark drew on I  knew that  haste was  needed,  so I rode 
thence with three others that could also be horsed. The rest of my company I  
sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath. I hope that 
I have not done ill?' He looked at his father. 
     'Ill?' cried Denethor,  and his eyes flashed suddenly. 'Why do you ask? 
The men were under your command. Or do you ask for my  judgement on all 
your 
deeds? Your bearing is lowly in my presence,  yet it is long  now  since you  
turned from your own way at my counsel. See, you have  spoken  skilfully, as 
ever; but  I, have I not seen your  eye fixed on Mithrandir, seeking whether  
you said well or too much? He has long had your heart in his keeping. 
     'My son, your  father is old but not yet dotard. I can see and hear, as 
was  my wont; and  little of what you have half said  or left unsaid  is now 
hidden from me. I know the answer to many riddles. Alas, alas for Boromir!' 
     'If what I have done  displeases you, my father,' said Faramir quietly, 
'I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a judgement 
was thrust on me.' 
     'Would that have availed to change your judgement?' said Denethor. 'You 
would still have done just so, I deem.  I k now you well. Ever your desire is 
to  appear lordly and generous as  a king of old, gracious, gentle. That may 
well befit one of high race, if he sits in power and peace. But in desperate 
hours gentleness may be repaid with death.' 
     'So be it,' said Faramir. 
     'So  be  it!' cried  Denethor.  'But  not  with your  death  only, Lord 
Faramir: with the death also of your father, and of all your people, whom it 
is your part to protect now that Boromir is gone.' 
     'Do you wish then,' said Faramir, 'that our places had been exchanged?' 
     'Yes,  I wish that indeed,' said Denethor. 'For Boromir was loyal to me 
and no wizard's pupil. He would have remembered his father's need, and would 
not  have squandered what  fortune gave.  He would have brought me  a  mighty 
gift.' 
     For a moment Faramir's restraint gave way. 'I would ask you, my father, 

####-to remember why it was that I,  not he, was in Ithilien. On  one occasion at 
least your counsel has prevailed, not long ago. It  was the Lord of the City 
that gave the errand to him.' 
     'Stir not the  bitterness in  the cup that  I mixed  for myself,'  said 
Denethor.  'Have I  not tasted it now  many nights upon my tongue foreboding 
that worse yet lay in the dregs? As now indeed I find. Would it were not so!  
Would that this thing had come to me!' 
     'Comfort yourself!'  said Gandalf.  'In  no  case  would  Boromir  have 
brought it to you. He is dead, and died well; may he sleep in peace! Yet you  
deceive yourself. He would have stretched out  his hand to this  thing,  and 
taking it he would have fallen. He would have kept it  for his own, and when  
he returned you would not have known your son.' 
     The face of Denethor set  hard and cold. 'You found Boromir less apt to 
your hand, did you not?' he said softly.  'But I who  was his father say that 
he would have  brought it to me.  You are wise,  maybe, Mithrandir, yet with 
all your subtleties you have not all wisdom.  Counsels may be found that are 
neither the  webs  of wizards  nor the haste of fools. I have in this matter 
more lore and wisdom than you deem. ' 
     'What then is your wisdom?' said Gandalf. 
     'Enough to  perceive  that there are two follies to avoid. To  use this 
thing is  perilous. At  this  hour, to send it  in  the hands  of a  witless 
halfling into the land of the Enemy himself, as you  have done, and this son 
of mine, that is madness.' 
     'And the Lord Denethor what would he have done?' 
     'Neither. But most surely  not  for any argument would he have set this 
thing at a hazard beyond all bu t a  fool's hope, risking our utter ruin,  if 
the  Enemy  should  recover what he lost. Nay, it  should  have  been  kept, 
hidden, hidden  dark and deep. Not used, I say, unless  at the uttermost end 
of need, but set beyond his grasp, save by a victory so  final that what then 
befell would not trouble us, being dead.' 
     'You  think,  as  is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only,' said Gandalf. 
'Yet there are other men and other lives, and time still to be.  And for me, 
I pity even his slaves.' 
     'And wher e  will other  men look for help, if  Gondor  falls?' answered 
Denethor. 'If I had this thing  now in  the deep  vaults of this citadel, we 
should not then  shake with  dread  under this gloom, fearing the worst, and 
our counsels would  be  undisturbed. If you do not trust  me  to endure  the 

####-test, you do not know me yet.' 
     'Nonetheless I do not trust you,' said Gandalf. 'Had I done so, I could 
have sent this thing hither to  your keeping  and  spared myself and  others 
much  anguish.  And now hearing  you speak  I trust you  less, no  more than 
Boromir. Nay, stay your wrath! I do  not trust myself in this, and I refused 
this thing, even as  a  freely given gift. You  are strong and can still  in 
some matters govern  yourself, Denethor; yet if you had received this thing,  
it  would  have  overthrown  you.  Were  it  buried  beneath  the  roots  of 
Mindolluin, still it would burn  your mind away, as the darkness grows,  and 
the yet worse things follow that soon shall come upon us.' 
     For a moment the eyes of Denethor glowed again as he faced Gandalf, and 
Pippin felt  once  more the  strain between  their wills;  but now almost it 
seemed  as if their glances were like blades  from eye to eye, flickering as 
they  fenced. Pippin trembled fearing  some  dreadful  stroke.  But suddenly  
Denethor relaxed and grew cold again. He shrugged his shoulders.  
     'If I had! If you had!' he said. 'Such words and ifs are  vain.  It has 
gone into the Shadow, and only time will show  what  doom awaits it  and us.  
The time will not  be long. In what is left, let all who fight  the Enemy in 
their fashion be at one, and keep hope while they may, and after hope  still 
the hardihood to die  free.' He turned to  Faramir.  'What think  you of the 
garrison at Osgiliath?' 
     'It is not strong,'  said Faramir. 'I have sent the company of Ithilien 
to strengthen it, as I have said.' 
     'Not enough, I deem,' said Denethor. 'It is  there that the first  blow 
will fall. They will have need of some stout captain there.' 
     'There  and  elsewhere  in many places,' said Faramir, and sighed. 'Alas 
for my brother, whom I too loved!' He rose. 'May I have your leave, father?' 
And then he swayed and leaned upon his father's chair. 
     'You are weary, I see,' said Denethor.  'You  have ridden  fast and far, 
and under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.' 
     'Let us not speak of that!' said Faramir. 
     'Then  we  will  not,'  said  Denethor. 'Go  now and  rest as you  may. 
Tomorrow's need will be sterner.' 
     All now took leave of the Lor d of the City and went to rest  while they 
still could.  Outside there  was a starless blackness as Gandalf with Pippin 
beside  him bearing a small torch, made  his way to their  lodging. They did  
not speak until they were behind closed  doors. Then  at  last  Pippin  took  

####-Gandalf's hand. 
     'Tell me,' he  said, 'is there any hope? For Frodo, I mean; or at least 
mostly for Frodo.' 
     Gandalf put his hand on Pippin's head. 'There never was much  hope,' he 
answered.  'Just a  fool's hope,  as  I have  been told. And when I heard of 
Cirith Ungol------' He broke  off and  strode to  the window as if his  eyes 
could pierce the night  in the East. 'Cirith Ungol!' he  muttered. 'Why that 
way, I wonder?' He turned.  'Just now, Pippin,  my heart almost  failed  me, 
hearing that name.  And yet  in truth  I believe that  the news that Faramir 
brings has some hope in it. For it seems clear that our Enemy has opened his 
war at last and made the first  move while Frodo was still free. So  now for  
many days  he will have his eye turned this way and that, away  from his own 
land. And yet, Pippin, I  feel from afar his haste and  fear.  He  has begun 
sooner than he would. Something has happened to stir him.' 
     Gandalf  stood for a moment in thought.  'Maybe,'  he  muttered.  'Maybe 
even your foolishness helped,  my lad. Let me see: some five days ago now he 
would discover that  we had thrown  down  Saruman and had  taken the  Stone. 
Still  what of that?  We could  not use it to much  purpose, or without  his 
knowing. Ah! I wonder. Aragorn? His time  draws  near. And he  is strong and 
stern underneath, Pippin; bold, determined, able to take his own counsel and 
dare great risks  at  need. That may be it. He may have used  the  Stone and 
shown  himself  to the  Enemy,  challenging  him, for  this very purpose.  I 
wonder. Well, we shall not know the answer till the Riders of Rohan come, if 
they do not come  too  late.  There are evil days ahead.  To sleep  while we 
may!' 
     'But,' said Pippin. 
     'But what?' said Gandalf. 'Only one but will I allow tonight.' 
     'Gollum,' said  Pippin. 'How  on  earth could they  be going about with 
him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not like the place  
he was taking them to any more than you do. What is wrong?' 
     'I cannot answer  that now,' said Gandalf. 'Yet  my heart guessed  that 
Frodo and Gollum  would  meet  before the end. For good, or for evil. But of 
Cirith  Ungol  I  will  not speak  tonight.  Treachery,  treachery  I  fear; 
treachery  of  that  miserable creature. But so it must be. Let us  remember  
that a traitor may betray himself and  do good that he does not  intend.  It 
can be so, sometimes. Good night! ' 
     The next day came with a morning like  a brown  dusk, and the hearts of 

####-men, lifted for a while by the return of Faramir, sank low again. The winged 
Shadows were  not  seen again  that day,  yet  ever and anon, high above the 
city, a faint cry would come,  and  many who heard  it  would stand stricken 
with a passing dread, while the less stout-hearted quailed and wept. 
     And now Faramir was gone again. 'They give him no rest,' some murmured. 
'The Lord drives his son too hard, and  now he must do the duty of  two, for  
himself  and  for  the  one that  will  not return.'  And  ever  men  looked 
northward, asking: 'Where are the Riders of Rohan?' 
     In truth Faramir did not  go  by  his own choosing. But the Lord of the 
City  was master of his  Council,  and he was in no mood that day  to bow to 
others. Early in the morning the  Council had been summoned.  There  all the 
captains judged that because of the threat in the South their force  was too 
weak  to  make any stroke of  war on  their own part,  unless perchance  the 
Riders of Rohan yet should come. Meanwhile they must man the walls and 
wait. 
     'Yet,'  said  Denethor,  'we  should  not  lightly  abandon  the  outer  
defences,  the Rammas made with so  great  a  labour. And the Enemy must 
pay 
dearly for the crossing of the River. That he cannot do, in  force to assail 
the City, either north of Cair Andros because of  the marshes, or southwards 
towards Lebennin because of the breadth of the River, that needs many boats.  
It  is at  Osgiliath that he  will  put his weight, as before  when  Boromir 
denied him the passage.' 
     'That was but a trial,' said Faramir. 'Today we may make  the Enemy pay 
ten times our  loss at  the passage and yet  rue  the  exchange.  For he can 
afford  to lose a host better  than we to lose a company. And the retreat of 
those  that we  put out  far afield  will  be per ilous, if he wins across in 
force.' 
     'And what of Cair Andros?' said the Prince. 'That, too, must  be  held, 
if Osgiliath  is defended.  Let  us  not forget  the danger on our left. The 
Rohirrim may  come,  and  they may not. But  Faramir  has  told us  of great 
strength drawing ever  to the Black Gate. More than  one host may issue from 
it, and strike for more than one passage.' 
     'Much must be risked in war,' said Denethor. 'Cair Andros is manned and  
no more  can be sent so far. But I will not yield the River and the Pelennor  
unfought  - not if there  is a captain  here who has still the courage to do 
his lord's will.' 

####-     Then all were silent, but at length Faramir said: 'I do not oppose your 
will, sire. Since you are robbed of Boromir, I will go and do what  I can in 
his stead  - if you command it.' 
     'I do so,' said Denethor. 
     'Then farewell!' said Faramir. 'But if I should return, think better of 
me!' 
     'That depends on the manner of your return,' said Denethor. 
     Gandalf it was that  last spoke  to Faramir ere he  rode east. 'Do  not 
throw your live away rashly or in bitterness,' he said. 'You  will be needed 
here,  for other things  than war. Your  father loves you, Faramir, and will 
remember it ere the end. Farewell!' 
     So now the Lord Faramir had gone  forth again, and had taken  with  him 
such strength of men as were willing to go  or could be spared. On the walls 
some gazed through the gloom towards the ruined city, and they wondered 
what 
chanced there, for nothing could be seen.  And others, as ever, looked north 
and counted the leagues to Thjoden in Rohan. 'Will he come? Will he 
remember  
our old alliance?' they said. 
     'Yes, he will  come,'  said  Gandalf, 'even  if  he comes too late. But 
think! At best the Red Arrow cannot have reached him more than two days 
ago, 
and the miles are long from Edoras.' 
     It was night again ere news came. A  man rode in  haste from the fords, 
saying that a host had issued from Minas Morgul and was already drawing nigh 
to Osgiliath; and it had been joined  by regiments from the South, Haradrim, 
cruel and tall. 'And we have learned ' said the messenger, 'that  the  Black  
Captain  leads  them once again,  and the fear of him  has passed before him 
over the River.' 
     With those ill-boding words the third day closed since  Pippin came  to 
Minas Tirith. Few went to rest, for small hope had any now that even Faramir 
could hold the fords for long. 
     The next day,  though the darkness  had reached  its  full and grew  no 
deeper, it weighed heavier  on men's  hearts, and a great dread was on them.  
Ill  news came soon  again.  The  passage of  Anduin was won  by  the Enemy. 
Faramir was retreating to the wall of  the Pelennor, rallying his men to the 
Causeway Forts; but he was ten times outnumbered. 

####-     'If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on his 
heels,' said  the messenger. 'They have paid dear for the  crossing but less 
dearly than we  hoped.  The plan has been well laid. It is now  seen that in 
secret  they have long been building  floats and barges in great numbers  in 
East  Osgiliath.  They  swarmed across  like  beetles.  But  it is the Black  
Captain  that  defeats us. Few  will stand and abide even the  rumour of his 
coming.  His own folk quail at him,  and they would  slay themselves  at his 
bidding.' 
     'Then I am needed  there more than here,' said Gandalf, and rode off at 
once,  and the glimmer  of him  faded soon  from  sight. And  all that night 
Pippin alone and sleepless stood upon the wall and gazed eastward. 
     The bells  of  day had  scarcely  rung  out again,  a  mockery  in  the 
unlightened dark, when  far  away he saw  fires spring up, across in the dim 
spaces where the walls of the Pelennor stood. The  watchmen cried aloud, and 
all men in the City stood to arms. Now ever and anon there was a  red flash,  
and slowly through the heavy air dull rumbles could be heard. 
     'They have taken the wall!' men cried. 'They are blasting  breaches  in 
it. They are coming!' 
     'Where  is Faramir?'  cried  Beregond in dismay.  'Say not  that he has 
fallen!' 
     It was  Gandalf that  brought the  first  tidings.  With  a  handful of 
horsemen he came in the middle morning, riding as escort to a line of wains.  
They were filled with wounded men, all that could be sa ved from the wreck of 
the Causeway Forts. At  once he went  to Denethor.  The Lord of the City sat 
now in a high chamber above the Hall of the White Tower  with Pippin  at his 
side;  and through  the dim windows, north and  south and east,  he bent his 
dark eyes, as if to pierce the shadows of doom that  ringed him  round. Most  
to the north  he looked, and would  pause at whiles to listen as  if by some 
ancient art his ears might hear the thunder of hoofs on the plains far away. 
     'Is Faramir come?' he a sked. 
     'No,' said Gandalf.  'But he still  lived when I  left him. Yet  he  is 
resolved  to stay  with the rearguard,  lest  the retreat over  the Pelennor  
become a rout.  He may,  perhaps, hold  his men  together long enough, but I  
doubt it.  He  is  pitted against a foe too great.  For one has come  that I 
feared.' 
     'Not -  the  Dark  Lord?'  cried Pippin, forgetting  his place  in  his 
terror. 

####-     Denethor laughed bitterly. 'Nay, not  yet, Master Peregrin! He will not 
come save  only to triumph over me when all is  won. He uses  others as  his 
weapons. So do  all great lords, if they  are wise,  Master Halfling. Or why 
should I sit here in  my tower and think, and watch, and wait, spending even 
my sons? For I can still wield a brand.' 
     He stood up and cast open his long black cloak, and behold! he was clad 
in mail beneath,  and girt  with a  long sword, great-hilted in a sheath  of 
black and silver. 'Thus have I walked, and thus  now  for many years  have I  
slept,' he said, 'lest with age the body should grow soft and timid.' 
     'Yet now under the Lord of Barad-dyr the most  fell of all his captains 
is already master of your outer  walls,'  said Gandalf. 'King of Angmar long 
ago, Sorcerer, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazgyl, a spear of terror in the hand 
of Sauron, shadow of despair.' 
     'Then, Mithrandir, you  had a  foe to  match you,'  said Denethor. 'For  
myself, I  have long known who is the chief captain of the hosts of the Dark 
Tower. Is this all that you have returned to say? Or can it be that you have 
withdrawn because you are overmatched?' 
     Pippin  trembled, fearing  that Gandalf would be stung to sudden wrath, 
but his fear was needless.  'It  might be so,' Gandalf answered softly. 'But 
our trial of strength is not yet come. And if words  spoken  of old be true, 
not by the hand of man  shall he fall, and hidden from the Wise  is the doom 
that awaits him.  However that may be, the Captain of Despair does not press 
forward,  yet.  He rules rather according to  the  wisdom that you have just 
spoken, from the rear, driving his slaves in madness on before. 
     'Nay, I came  rather to guard the hurt men that can yet be  healed; for 
the Rammas is  breached far and wide, and soon the host of Morgul will enter  
in at many points. And I came chiefly to say this. Soon there will be battle 
on  the  fields. A sortie must be made  ready.  Let it be of mounted men. In 
them lies our  brief hope, for in one thing only is  the enemy  still poorly 
provided: he has few horsemen.' 
     'And we also have few. Now  would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of 
time,' said Denethor. 
     'We are likely to see other newcomers first,' said  Gandalf. 'Fugitives 
from Cair Andros have  already reached us. The isle has fallen. Another army 
is come from the Black Gate, crossing from the north-east.' 
     'Some have accused  you, Mithrandir,  of  delighting to bear ill news,' 
said Denethor, 'but to  me  this is  no longer news: it  was known to mw ere 

####-nightfall yesterday. As for the sortie,  I had already given thought to  it. 
Let us go down.' 
     Time  passed. At length watchers on the walls could  see the retreat of 
the  out-companies. Small bands of weary  and  often wounded  men came first  
with  little  order; some  were running wildly  as if  pursued. Away to  the 
ea stward the distant fires flickered; and  now it seemed that here and there 
they crept across the plain. Houses and barns were burning.  Then from  many 
points little  rivers of red flame  came  hurrying on,  winding through  the 
gloom,  converging  towards   the line of  the broad  road that  led from the 
City-gate to Osgiliath. 
     'The enemy,' men  murmured. 'The  dike is  down. Here they come pouring 
through the  breaches! And they carry  torches,  it seems. Where are our own 
folk?' 
     It drew now to evening by the hour, and  the light was so dim that even 
far-sighted men upon the  Citadel could  discern little clearly out upon the 
fields, save only the  burnings that ever multiplied, and the lines  of fire 
that grew in length and speed.  At last, less than a mile  from  the City, a  
more ordered mass of men came into view, marching not running, still holding 
together. 
     The watchers held their breath. 'Faramir must be there,' they said. 'He 
can govern man and beast. He will make it yet.' 
     Now  the  main retreat  was scarcely  two furlongs distant. Out of  the 
gloom behind a small company of horsemen galloped, all that was  left of the 
rearguard. Once again they turned at bay, facing the oncoming lines of fire. 
Then  suddenly  there was a tumult of   fierce cries. Horsemen of  the  enemy  
swept up. The lines of fire became flowing torrents,  file upon file of Orcs 
bearing flames, and wild Southron men with red banners, shouting with  harsh 
tongues, surging up, overtaking the retreat. And with a  piercing cry out of 
the dim sky fell the winged shadows, the Nazgyl stooping to the kill. 
     The retreat became a rout. Already men were breaking away, flying  wild  
and witless here and there, flinging away their weapons, crying out in fear, 
falling to the ground. 
     And then a trumpet rang from the Citadel, and Denethor at last released 
the sortie. Drawn up  within  the shadow of the  Gate and under the  looming 
walls outside they had waited for his signal: all the  mounted men that were 
left in the City.  Now they  sprang forward, formed, quickened to  a gallop, 
and charged with a great shout. And  from the walls an answering  shout went 

####-up; for foremost on the field rode the swan-knights of Dol Amroth with their  
Prince and his blue banner at their head. 
     'Amroth for Gondor!' they cried. 'Amroth to Faramir!' 
     Like thunder they broke  upon the enemy on either flank of the retreat; 
but  one rider outran  them  all, swift as the  wind in the grass: Shadowfax 
bore him, shining,  unveiled  once  more, a light starting from his upraised 
hand. 
     The Nazgyl screeched and swept away, for their Captain was not yet come 
to challenge the  white fire of his foe. The hosts of Morgul intent on their 
prey,  taken at  unawares in wild career, broke, scattering like sparks in a  
gale. The out-companies with a great cheer turned and smote their  pursuers.  
Hunters  became the hunted. The retreat  became  an onslaught. The field was 
strewn with stricken orcs and  men, and a  reek arose of torches cast  away, 
sputtering ou t in swirling smoke. The cavalry rode on. 
     But  Denethor  did not  permit them to  go  far.  Though the enemy  was 
checked, and for the moment driven back, great forces  were flowing  in from 
the East.  Again  the  trumpet rang,  sounding the retreat.  The cavalry  of 
Gondor halted. Behind their screen the out-companies re-formed. Now steadily 
they  came marching  back. They  reached the  Gate  of the City and entered,  
stepping  proudly:  and  proudly the people of the  City looked  on them and 
cried their praise, and  yet they were troubled in heart. For the  companies 
were grievously reduced. Faramir had lost a third of his men. And  where was 
he? 
     Last of all he came. His men passed in. The  mounted knights  returned, 
and at their rear  the banner  of Dol Amroth, and the Prince. And in his arms 
before him on  his  horse  he bore  the body of his kinsman, Faramir  son of 
Denethor, found upon the stricken field. 
     'Faramir! Faramir!' men cried, weeping in the  streets.  But he did not 
answer, and they  bore him away up the winding  road to the Citadel  and his 
father. Even  as the Nazgyl had swerved aside  from the  onset of  the White 
Rider,  there came flying a deadly dart, and Faramir,  as he  held at bay  a  
mounted champion of Harad, had  fallen to the earth.  Only the charge of Dol 
Amroth had saved him from the red southland swords that would have hewed 
him 
as he lay. 
     The Prince Imrahil brought  Faramir to  the White Tower, and  he  said: 
Your son has returned, lord, after  great deeds, and he told all that he had 

####-seen. But Denethor rose  and looked on the face  of his  son and was silent. 
Then he  bade  them make a bed  in the  chamber and lay Faramir  upon it and 
depart. But  he himself went up alone into the  secret room under the summit 
of the Tower; and many who looked  up thither  at that time saw a pale light  
that gleamed and  flickered from the  narrow  windows for a while,  and then 
flashed and  went  out. And when Denethor descended again he went to 
Faramir 
and sat beside him withou t speaking, but the face of the Lord was grey, more 
deathlike than his son's.  
     So now at last the  City was besieged, enclosed in a ring  of foes. The 
Rammas  was broken, and all the Pelennor  abandoned  to the Enemy.  The last  
word  to  come  from outside the  walls  was  brought by men flying down the 
northward road ere the  Gate was  shut. They were the remnant of  the  guard 
that was kept  at that point where the way from Anurien and  Rohan  ran into 
the townlands: Ingold led them, the same who had admitted Gandalf and Pippin 
less than five days before,  while the sun still rose and there was hope  in 
the morning. 
     'There is no  news of the Rohirrim,' he said. 'Rohan will not come now.  
Or if they come, it will not avail us. The new host that we had  tidings  of 
has come first, from over  the River by way of Andros, it is said.  They are 
strong: battalions of Orcs of the Eye, and  countless companies of Men of  a  
new sort that  we have not met before. Not tall, but broad and grim, bearded 
like dwarves, wielding great axes. Out of some savage land in the  wide East  
they come, we  deem. They hold  the northward road; and  many have passed 
on 
into Anurien. The Rohirrim cannot come.' 
     The Gate was shut. All night watchmen on the  walls heard the rumour of 
the enemy that roamed outside,  burning field  and tree, and  hewing any man 
that they found abroad, living or  dead. The numbers that had already passed  
over the River  could not be guessed  in the darkness, but when  morning, or  
its  dim shadow,  stole over the plain, it was seen that  even fear by night 
had  scarcely over -counted them.  The plain was  dark  with  their  marching 
companies, and as far as eyes could strain in the  mirk there sprouted, like 
a  foul fungus-growth, all about the beleaguered  city great camps of tents, 
black or sombre red. 
     Busy as ants hurrying orcs were digging, digging lines of deep trenches 
in a huge ring, just out of bowshot from the walls; and as the trenches were 

####-made each was filled with fire, though how it was  kindled or fed, by art or  
devilry, none could see.  All day the labour  went forward, while the men of 
Minas Tirith  looked  on, unable to hinder it. And as each  length of trench 
was  completed,  they  could see great wains approaching; and soon yet  more 
companies of the enemy were swiftly setting up, each behind  the cover of  a  
trench, great engines for the casting of missiles. There were  none upon the 
City walls large enough to reach so far or to stay the work. 
     At  first  men laughed and did   not greatly fear  such devices. For the 
main  wall of  the City was of great height and  marvellous thickness, built 
ere the power and craft of N®menor waned in exile; and its outward  face was 
like  to the Tower  of  Orthanc,  hard and dark and smooth, unconquerable by 
steel or  fire, unbreakable except  by some  convulsion that would rend  the 
very earth on which it stood. 
     'Nay,'  they said,  'not if  the Nameless One himself should come,  not 
even he could enter here while  we yet live.'  But some answered: 'While  we 
yet live? How long? He has  a weapon that has brought low many strong places 
since the world began. Hunger. The roads are cut. Rohan will not come.' 
     But the engines did not waste shot upon the indomitable wall. It was no 
brigand or orc-chieftain that ordered the assault upon the Lord  of Mordor's 
greatest  foe. A  power and mind of malice guided  it. As soon as  the great 
catapults were set, with many yells and the creaking of rope and winch, they 
began to throw  missiles marvellou sly high, so that they passed  right above 
the  battlement and fell thudding  within the first circle of  the City; and 
many of them by some secret art burst into flame as they came toppling down. 
     Soon there  was great peril of fire behind the wall,  and all who could 
be spared  were busy quelling the flames that sprang up in many places. Then 
among the greater casts  there  fell  another hail, less  ruinous  but  more 
horrible. All about the streets and lanes behind the Gate  it tumbled  down, 
small round shot that did not burn. But when men ran  to learn what it might  
be, they cried aloud or wept.  For the enemy was flinging into  the City all 
the heads of  those who had  fallen fighting at Osgiliath, or on the Rammas,  
or  in the fields. They were grim to look on; for though some  were  crushed 
and shapeless, and some had  been cruelly hewn, yet  many had  features that 
could be told,  and  it  seemed that  they  had  died in pain;  and all were 
branded with  the foul token of the Lidless Eye. But marred  and dishonoured 
as  they were, it often chanced  that thus a man would see again the face of 
someone  that he had known, who had  walked proudly once in arms,  or tilled 

####-the fields, or ridden in upon a holiday from the green vales in the hills.  
     In vain men shook  their fists at the pitiless foes that swarmed before 
the Gate. Curses they heeded not, nor understood the tongues of western men; 
crying with harsh voices like beasts and  carrion-birds. But soon there were 
few left in Minas Tirith who had the heart to stand up and defy the hosts of 
Mordor.  For yet another weapon, swifter than hunger,  the Lord of the  Dark 
Tower had: dread and despair. 
     The Nazgyl came again, and  as  their  Dark Lord now grew and put forth  
his strength, so their voices, which uttered only his  will and  his malice, 
were filled with  evil and  horror. Ever they circled  above the  City, like 
vultures that expect their fill of doomed men's flesh. Out of sight and shot 
they  flew, and yet were ever present, and their deadly voices rent the air. 
More unbearable they became, not  less, at each new cry.  At length even the 
stout-hearted would  fling  themselves to the  ground as the  hidden  menace 
passed  over  them,  or they would  stand, letting  their  weapons fall from 
nerveless hands while into their minds a blackness came, and they thought no 
more of war, but only of hiding and of crawling, and of death. 
     During all this black day Faramir  lay  upon his bed  in the chamber of 
the White Tower, wandering  in  a  desperate fever; dying someone  said, and 
soon  'dying' all men were saying upon  the walls and in the streets. And by 
him his father sat, and said nothing, but watched, and gave  no  longer  any 
heed to the defence. 
     No  hours  so dark had  Pippin known, not  even in the clutches  of the 
Uruk-hai. It was  his duty to wait upon the Lord, and wait he did, forgotten 
it seemed, standing by  the  door of the unlit  chamber, mastering  his  own 
fears as best he could. And as  he  watched, it seemed to him that  Denethor  
grew old before his eyes, as if something had snapped in his proud will, and 
his stern mind was  overthrown. Grief maybe had wrought it, and  remorse. He 
saw tears on that once tearless face, more unbearable than wrath. 
     'Do not weep, lord,' he stammered. 'Perhaps he will get well. Have  you  
asked Gandalf?' 
     'Comfort me  not  with wizards!' said Denethor.  'The  fool's  hope has 
failed.  The Enemy has  found it, and now his power waxes; he sees  our very 
thoughts, and all we do is ruinous. 
     'I sent my  son forth,  unthanked, unblessed, out  into needless peril, 
and here he lies with poison in his veins. Nay, nay, whatever may now betide 
in war, my line too is  ending, even the House  of the Stewards  has failed. 

####-Mean  folk shall rule  the last remnant of the Kings of Men, lurking in  the 
hills until all are hounded out.' 
     Men came to the  door crying for the Lord of the City. 'Nay, I will not 
come down,' he said. 'I must stay beside my son. He might still speak before 
the end. But that is near. Follow whom you will,  even the Grey Fool, though 
his hope has failed. Here I stay.' 
     So it was that Gandalf took command of the last defence of the City  of 
Gondor.  Wherever he came  men's  hearts would  lift  again,  and the winged 
shadows pass from memory. Tirelessly he strode  from Citadel to  Gate,  from 
north to south about the wall; and with him went the Prince of Dol Amroth in 
his shining mail. For he and his knights still held themselves like lords in 
whom the race  of N®menor  ran   true. Men that  saw them  whispered  saying: 
'Belike the old tales speak well; there is Elvish blood in the veins of that 
folk, for the people of Nimrodel dwelt in that land once long ago.' And then 
one would sing amid the gloom  some staves of the Lay of Nimrodel, or  other  
songs of the Vale of Anduin out of vanished years.  
     And  yet  - when they had  gone, the shadows closed  on  men  again, and  
their hearts  went cold, and the valour of Gondor  withered into ash. And so 
slowly  they passed out of  a  dim  day  of  fears  into  the darkness of  a  
desperate night. Fires  now raged unchecked in the first circle of the City, 
and the garrison upon the outer wall was already in many places cut off from 
retreat.  But the  faithful who remained there at their  posts were few; most  
had fled beyond the second gate. 
     Far behind the  battle the  River had been swiftly bridged, and all day 
more  force  and  gear of  war had poured across. Now at last  in the middle 
night  the  assault was loosed. The vanguard  passed through the trenches of 
fire by many devious paths that had been  left between  them. On  they came, 
reckless of their loss as they  approached, still bunched and herded, within 
the  range of  bowmen on the  wall. But indeed  there were too few  now  left  
there to do them great damage, though the  light of the fires showed up many 
a mark for archers of such skill as Gondor once had boasted. Then perceiving 
that the valour of the City was already beaten down, the  hidden Captain put 
forth his strength. Slowly the great siege-towers  built in Osgiliath rolled 
forward through the dark. 
     Messengers came again to the chamber in the White Tower, and Pippin let 
them enter,  for  they were  urgent. Denethor  turned  his head slowly  from 
Faramir's face, and  looked at them silently. 

####-     'The first circle of  the City is burning, lord,'  they said. 'What are 
your  commands?  You are  still  the  Lord and Steward.  Not all will follow 
Mithrandir. Men are flying from the walls and leaving them unmanned.' 
     'Why? Why do the fools fly?' said Denethor. 'Better to burn sooner than 
late, for burn we must. Go back to your bonfire! And I? I will go now to  my  
pyre. To my  pyre! No tomb for Denethor  and Faramir. No tomb! No  long 
slow 
sleep of death embalmed. We wil l burn like heathen kings before  ever a ship 
sailed hither from the West. The West has failed. Go back and burn!' 
     The messengers without bow or answer turned and fled. 
     Now Denethor  stood up and released the fevered hand of Faramir that he 
had held. 'He is burning, already burning,' he said sadly. 'The house of his 
spirit crumbles.' Then stepping softly towards Pippin he looked down at him. 
     'Farewell!' he said. 'Farewell, Peregrin  son of Paladin!  Your service 
has  been short,  and now  it is drawing to an end.  I release you from  the 
little that remains. Go now, and die in what way seems best to you. And with 
whom you will, even that friend whose  folly brought you to this death. Send 
for my servants and then go. Farewell!' 
     'I will  not say  farewell, my  lord,' said  Pippin kneeling.  And then 
suddenly  hobbit-like  once more, he stood up  and looked the old man in the  
eyes. 'I will  take your leave, sir,' he said;  'for  I want to  see Gandalf 
very much indeed. But he is no fool; and I will  not think of dying until he 
despairs of life.  But  from my word  and your service I do  not  wish to be 
released while you live. And if they come at last to the Citadel,  I hope to 
be here and stand beside you and earn  perhaps the arms that you have  given 
me.' 
     'Do as  you  will,  Master  Halfling,' said Denethor.  'But  my life is 
broken. Send for my servants!' He turned back to Faramir. 
     Pippin left him and called for the servants, and they came: six  men of 
the household, strong and fair; yet they trembled  at the summons. But in  a  
quiet voice  Denethor bade them lay warm coverlets on Faramir's bed and take 
it up. And they  did  so, and  lifting  up the  bed  they  bore it from  the 
chamber. Slowly they paced to trouble the fevered man as little as might be,  
and Denethor, now bending on a staff, followed them; and last came Pippin.  
     Out from the White Tower they walked, as if to a funeral,  out into the 
darkness,  where the overhanging cloud was lit beneath with flickers of dull  
red.  Softly they paced the  great  courtyard,  and  at a word from Denethor  

####-halted beside the Withered Tree. 
     All was silent, save for the rumour of war in the City down  below, and 
they heard the  water  dripping sadly  from  the dead branches into the  dark 
pool. Then they went on through the Citadel gate, where the  sentinel stared  
at  them in wonder and dismay as they passed by.  Turning westward they came 
at length to  a door in the rearward wall of the sixth circle. Fen Hollen it 
was called, for it was kept ever shut save at times of funeral, and only the 
Lord of  the  City might use that  way, or those who  bore the token of  the 
tombs and tended the houses of the  dead. Beyond it went a winding road that 
descended in  many curves down  to the  narrow  land  under  the  shadow  of 
Mindolluin's  precipice  where stood the mansions of the dead Kings  and  of 
their Stewards.  
     A porter  sat in a  little house beside  the way,  and with fear in his 
eyes he came  forth bearing  a lantern in his hand. At the Lord's command he 
unlocked the door, and  silently it  swung  back; and  they passed  through, 
taking  the lantern from his  hand. It was dark on the climbing road between 
ancient  walls  and   many -pillared   balusters   looming  in  the   swaying 
lantern-beam. Their  slow feet echoed as  they walked down,  down, until  at 
last they came to  the Silent Street,  Rath  Dnnen, between  pale  domes and 
empty halls and images of men long dead;  and they entered into the House of 
the Stewards and set down their burden. 
     There  Pippin,  staring uneasily about  him, saw that he was in  a wide 
vaulted chamber,  draped as it  were with the great shadows that  the little 
lantern threw upon its shrouded  walls. And dimly to  be seen were many rows 
of tables, carved of marble;  and upon each table lay a sleeping form, hands 
folded, head pillowed upon stone. But one table near at hand stood broad and 
bare. Upon it at a sign from Denethor they laid Faramir  and his father side 
by side, and covered them with one covering, and stood then with bowed heads 
as mourners beside a bed of death. Then Denethor spoke in a low voice. 
     'Here we will wait,' he said. 'But send not for the embalmers. Bring us 
wood quick to  burn, and lay it all about us, and beneath; and pour oil upon 
it. And when I bid you thrust in  a torch. Do this and speak no more to  me. 
Farewell!' 
     'By your leave, lord!' said Pippin and turned and fled  in terror  from 
the  deathly house. 'Poor Faramir!' he thought.  'I must find Gandalf.  Poor 
Faramir!  Quite likely he needs medicine  more than  tears.  Oh, where can I  
find Gandalf? In the thick of things, I suppose; and he will have no time to 

####-spare for dying men or madmen.' 
     At the door he turned to one  of the servants who had remained on guard 
there.  'Your master is not himself,' he  said. 'Go slow! Bring  no fire  to 
this place while Faramir lives! Do nothing until Gandalf comes!' 
     'Who is  the  master  of  Minas  Tirith?' the  man  answered. 'The Lord 
Denethor or the Grey Wanderer?' 
     'The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem,' said Pippin, and he  sped 
back and up the winding way as swiftly as his feet would carry him, past the 
astonished porter, out through  the door, and on, till he came near the gate 
of the Citadel. The sentinel hailed him as he went by, and he recognized the 
voice of Beregond. 
     'Whither do you run, Master Peregrin?' he cried. 
     'To find Mithrandir,' Pippin answered. 
     'The Lord's errands are urgent and should not be hindered by me,'  said 
Beregond;  'but tell  me quickly, if you may:  what goes forward? Whither has 
my  Lord gone? I have just come on duty, but I  heard that he passed towards 
the Closed Door, and men were bearing Faramir before him.' 
     'Yes,' said Pippin, 'to the Silent Street.' 
     Beregond bowed his  head  to  hide his tears.  'They said that  he  was 
dying,' he sighed, 'and now he is dead.' 
     'No,' said Pippin, 'not yet. And even now his death might be prevented, 
I think. But the Lord of  the City, Beregond,  has fallen before his city is 
taken. He is fey and dangerous.' Quickly he told of Denethor's strange words 
and deeds. 'I must find Gandalf at once.' 
     'Then you must go down to the battle.' 
     'I  know. The Lord has given me  leave. But,  Beregond, if you can,  do 
someth ing to stop any dreadful thing happening.' 
     'The Lord  does not permit those who wear the black and silver to leave 
their post for any cause, save at his own command.' 
     'Well,  you  must  choose between orders and the life of Faramir,' said 
Pippin.   'And as for orders,  I think you  have a madman to deal with, not a  
lord. I must run. I will return if I can.' 
     He ran on,  down, down towards the outer city. Men flying back from the 
burning passed him, and some  seeing his livery turned  and shouted, but  he 
paid no heed. At last he was through  the Second Gate,  beyond  which  great 
fires  leaped up between the walls. Yet it seemed strangely silent. No noise 
or shouts of battle or din of arms could be heard. Then suddenly there was a  

####-dreadful cry a nd a great shock,  and a deep echoing boom. Forcing himself on 
against a gust of fear and horror that shook him almost to his knees. Pippin 
turned a  corner opening on the wide place behind  the City Gate. He stopped 
dead. He had found Gandalf; but he shrank back, cowering into a shadow.  
     Ever since the middle  night the  great assault had gone  on. The drums 
rolled. To the  north and to the  south company upon company  of  the  enemy 
pressed to the walls. There came great beasts, like moving houses in the red  
and fitful light, the mymakil  of  the Harad dragging through the lanes  amid 
the fires huge towers and engines. Yet their Captain cared not  greatly what 
they  did or how many might be slain:  their purpose was  only to  test  the 
strength of the defence and to  keep the men  of Gondor busy in many places.  
It was against the Gate that he would throw his heaviest weight. Very strong 
it might be, wrought of steel and iron, and guarded with towers and bastions 
of indomitable stone, yet it was the key, the weakest point in all that high 
and impenetrable wall. 
     The drums  rolled louder. Fires leaped up. Great engines crawled across 
the field; and in the midst was a huge ram, great as a forest -tree a hundred 
feet in length,  swinging on mighty chains. Long had  it been forging in the 
dark smithies  of Mordor, and  its hideous head, founded of black steel, was 
shaped in  the likeness of a ravening wolf; on it spells of  ruin lay. Grond 
they named it,  in memory of  the Hammer of the  Underworld  of  old.  Great 
beasts drew it,  Orcs surrounded  it, and  behind  walked mountain-trolls to 
wield it. 
     But about the Gate resistance still was stout, and there the knights of 
Dol Amroth and the hardiest of the garrison stood at bay. Shot and dart fell 
thick; siege-towers crashed or blazed  suddenly like torches. All before the 
walls on either side of the Gate the  ground was choked  with wreck and with 
bodies of the slain; yet still driven as by a madness more and more came up.  
     Grond crawled on. Upon  its housing no fire would catch; and though now 
and again some great beast that  hauled it would go  mad and spread stamping 
ruin among  the  orcs  innumerable  that guarded  it, their bodies were cast  
aside from its path and others took their place. 
     Grond crawled on. The drums  rolled wildly. Over the  hills of slain  a  
hideous shape appeared: a horseman, tall,  hooded, cloaked in black. Slowly, 
trampling the fallen,  he rode forth, heeding no  longer any dart. He halted 
and held up  a long pale sword. And as he did so a great  fear  fell on all, 
defender  and foe alike; and the hands of men drooped to their sides, and no  

####-bow sang. For a moment all was still. 
     The drums rolled and rattled. With a vast rush Grond was hurled forward 
by  huge hands. It reached the Gate. It  swung. A  deep boom rumbled through 
the City like thunder running in the clouds. But the doors of iron and posts 
of steel withstood the stroke. 
     Then  the  Black Captain rose  in  his  stirrups and  cried  aloud in a  
dreadful voice, speaking in some forgotten tongue words of power and  terror 
to rend both heart and stone. 
     Thrice he cried.  Thrice  the great ram boomed.  And suddenly  upon the 
last  stroke the Gate of Gondor broke. As if stricken by some blasting spell 
it burst asunder:  there  was  a flash of searing  lightning, and the  doors 
tumbled in riven fragments to the ground. 
     In rode the Lord  of the Nazgyl. A great black  shape against the fires 
beyond he loomed up, grown  to a vast menace of despair. In rode the Lord of 
the Nazgyl, under  the  archway that no  enemy ever yet had  passed, and all  
fled before his face. 
     All save one. There waiting,  silent and still in the  space before the 
Gate, sat Gandalf upon Shadowfax: Shadowfax who alone  among the free 
horses 
of  the earth endured the terror, unmoving,  steadfast as  a graven image in 
Rath Dnnen. 
     'You  cannot enter here,' said Gandalf, and the huge shadow halted. 'Go 
back to the abyss prepared  for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingness that 
awaits you and your Master. Go!' 
     The Black Rider flung back his hood, and behold! he had a kingly crown;  
and yet upon no head visible was it set. The red fires  shone between it and 
the mantled shoulders vast and dark. From a mouth unseen there came a deadly 
laughter. 
     'Old fool!' he  said. 'Old fool! This is my hour. Do you not know Death 
when you see it? Die  now and curse in vain!' And  with that he lifted  high 
his sword and flames ran down the blade. 
     Gandalf did  not move.  And in that  very moment,  away  behind in some 
courtyard  of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear  he crowed,  recking 
nothing of wizardry or war, welcoming  only  the morning that in the sky far  
above the shadows of death was coming with the dawn. 
     And  as  if in  answer there  came from far away  another note.  Horns,  
horns, horns. In dark Mindolluin's sides  they dimly  echoed. Great horns of 

####-the North wildly blowing. Rohan had come at last. 

####- 
 

Chapter 5. The Ride of the Rohirrim 

 
 
     It was dark and Merry could see  nothing as he lay on the ground rolled 
in a blanket; yet  though the night was airless and windless, all  about him 
hidden  trees were sighing  softly. He lifted  his  head.  Then he heard  it 
again: a  sound like faint drums in the wooded hills and mountain-steps. The 
throb would cease suddenly and then be taken up again  at some other  point, 
now nearer, now further off. He wondered if the watchmen had heard it. 
     He  could not see  them,  but he  knew  that  all  round  him were  the 
companies of the Rohirrim. He could smell the horses in  the dark, and could 
hear their shiftings  and their soft stamping on  the needle-covered ground. 
The host  was bivouacked in  the  pine-woods that  clustered about  Eilenach  
Beacon, a tall  hill standing up from  the long ridges of the Dr®adan Forest  
that lay beside the great road in East Anurien. 
     Tired as he was Merry could not sleep. He had ridden now  for four days 
on end,  and the ever -deepening gloom had slowly  weighed down his heart. He 
began to wonder   why he had been so  eager to come,  when he had  been given 
every excuse, even his lord's command, to  stay behind. He wondered, too, if 
the  old  King knew  that he had been disobeyed and  was angry. Perhaps not. 
There seemed  to be  some understanding   between Dernhelm  and Elfhelm,  
the 
Marshal  who commanded  the  jored in which they were riding. He and all  his 
men ignored Merry and  pretended not to hear if he spoke. He might have been 
just  another bag that  Dernhelm was  carrying. Dernhelm was  no comfort: he 
never spoke to anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and  lonely. Now the time 
was anxious, and  the host was in peril.  They were less than a  day's  ride 
from the out-walls of Minas Tirith  that encircled the townlands. Scouts had 
been sent ahead. Some  had not returned.  Others hastening back had reported 
that the  road was  held in  force against  them.  A  host  of the enemy was 
encamped upon it, three miles west of Amon Don, and some strength of men 
was 
already  thrusting along the road  and  was no more than three  leagues away.  
Orcs were roving in  the hills  and  woods along the  roadside. The king and  
Jomer held council in the watches of the night. 
     Merry  wanted somebody to  talk to, and he thought of Pippin.  But that 

####-only increased his  restlessness. Poor Pippin, shut up in the great city  of 
stone,  lonely and  afraid. Merry wished he was a tall Rider  like Jomer and 
could  blow  a horn or something and go galloping to his rescue.  He sat up, 
listening  to the  drums  that  were  beating again,  now  nearer  at  hand. 
Presently  he  heard  voices  speaking  low, and  he  saw  dim half-shrouded  
lanterns passing  through the trees. Men nearby began to move uncertainly in 
the dark. 
     A tall figure loomed up and stumbled over  him, cu rsing the tree-roots.  
He recognized the voice of the Marshal, Elfhelm. 
     'I am not a tree-root, Sir,' he said, 'nor a bag, but a bruised hobbit. 
The least you can do in amends is to tell me what is afoot.' 
     'Anything that  can keep so  in this  devi l's mirk,' answered  Elfhelm. 
'But my lord sends word that we must  set ourselves in readiness: orders may 
come for a sudden move.' 
     'Is  the enemy coming then?' asked Merry  anxiously.  'Are those  their 
drums? I began to think I was  imagining them, as no one else seemed to take 
any notice of them.' 
     'Nay, nay,' said  Elfhelm, 'the enemy  is on the road not in the hills.  
You hear the Woses, the Wild Men of the Woods: thus they talk together  from 
afar. They still haunt Dr®adan Forest, it is said. Remnants of an older time 
they be, living few and  secretly, wild and wary as the beasts. They go  not 
to war with Gondor or  the Mark; but  now they  are troubled by the darkness 
and the  coming of the orcs:  they fear lest the Dark Years be returning, as 
seems  likely enough.  Let us be thankful that they are  not hunting us: for  
they use poisoned  arrows,  it is  said,  and  they  are  woodcrafty  beyond 
compare. But  they have offered their services to  Thjoden. Even now one  of 
their headmen is being taken to  the king. Yonder  go the lights.  So much I 
have heard but no more. And now I must busy myself with my  lord's 
commands. 
Pack yourself up, Master Bag!' He vanished into the shadows.  
     Merry did not like this talk of wild men  and poisoned darts, but quite 
apart from that a great weight of dread  was on him. Waiting was unbearable. 
He  longed to know  what was going to happen. He got up and soon was 
walking 
warily in pursuit of the last lantern before it disappeared among the trees.  
     Presently he came to an open  space  where a small tent had been set up 
for the king under a great tree. A large lantern, covered above, was hanging 

####-from a bough and cast  a  pale circle of  light below. There sat Thjoden and 
Jomer, and before  them  on the ground sat a strange  squat shape of a  man,  
gnarled as an old  stone, and the hairs of his scanty beard straggled on his 
lumpy chin like  dry  moss.  He was  short-legged and fat-armed,  thick  and 
stumpy, and  clad only  with grass about his waist. Merry  felt  that he  had 
seen  him  before  somewhere, and suddenly  he remembered  the  P®kel-men 
of 
Dunharrow. Here  was one of those old  images  brought to life, or  maybe  a 
creature descended  in true line through endless years from the models  used 
by the forgotten craftsmen long ago. 
     There was  a silence as Merry crept nearer, and then the Wild Man began 
to speak, in answer to some  question, it  seemed.  His  voice  was deep and 
guttural,  yet to Merry's  surprise he spoke  the Common Speech, though in a 
halting fashion, and uncouth words were mingled with it. 
     'No, father of  Horse-men,' he  said,  'we fight not. Hunt  only.  Kill 
gorgyn  in woods, hate orc-folk. You hate gorgyn too. We help as we can. Wild 
Men have long ears and long eyes; know all  paths. Wild Men live here before 
Stone-houses; before Tall Men come up out of Water.' 
     'But our need is for aid in battle,' said Jomer. 'How will you and your 
folk help us?' 
     'Bring news,' said  the Wild Man. 'We look out from hills. We climb big 
mountain  and look down.  Stone-city is shut. Fire burns there  outside; now 
inside too. You  wish to come there? Then you must be  quick. But gorgyn and 
men out  of  far-away,'  he waved a  short gnarled  arm  eastward,  'sit  on 
horse-road. Very many, mor e than Horse-men.' 
     'How do you know that?' said Jomer. 
     The old man's flat face and dark eyes showed nothing, but his voice was 
sullen  with displeasure.  'Wild  men are wild, free, but not  children,' he 
answered. 'I am great headman, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn. I count many things: stars in 
sky, leaves  on trees, men in  the dark. You have a score of scores  counted 
ten  times and five. They  have more.  Big fight, and who will win? And many 
more walk round walls of Stone-houses.' 
     'Alas! he speaks all too shrewdly,' said  Thjoden. 'And our scouts  say 
that they have  cast trenches  and  stakes across the road.  We cannot sweep 
them away in sudden onset.' 
     'And yet we need great haste,' said Jomer. 'Mundburg is on fire!' 
     'Let Ghvn-buri-Ghvn finish!' said the Wild Man. 'More than one road  he  

####-knows. He will lead you by road where no pits are, no gorgyn walk, only Wild 
Men  and  beasts. Many paths were  made  when Stonehouse-folk were 
stronger. 
They carved  hills as  hunters carve beast -flesh.  Wild  Men  think they ate 
stone for food. They  went through Dr®adan  to Rimmon with great wains. 
They 
go  no longer. Road is forgotten, but not by Wild  Men. Over hill and behind 
hill it  lies still  under grass and tree, there behind Rimmon  and down  to 
Don, and back at the  end to  Horse -men's road. Wild Men will show  you that 
road. Then you will kill gorgyn  and drive away bad dark  with  bright iron, 
and Wild Men can go back to sleep in the wild woods.' 
     Jomer  and  the king  spoke  together  in their  own  tongue. At length 
Thjoden turned to the Wild Man.   'We will receive your offer,' he said.  'For  
though we leave a host of foes behind, what matter? If the Stone-city falls, 
then we shall  have  no returning. If it  is saved, then the orc-host itself 
will be cut off. If you are faithful, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn, then we will  give you  
rich reward, and you shall have the friendship of the Mark for ever.' 
     'Dead  men are not friends to living men, and give them no gifts,' said 
the Wild Man.  'But if you live after the Darkness, then leave Wild Men alone 
in the woods and do  not hunt them like beasts any more. Ghvn-buri-Ghvn will 
not lead  you into trap. He will go himself with father of Horse-men, and if 
he leads you wrong, you will kill him.' 
     'So be it!' said Thjoden. 
     'How long will it take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road?' 
asked Jomer. 'We must go at foot-pace, if you guide us; and  I doubt not the 
way is narrow.' 
     'Wild Men go quick on feet,' said Ghvn. 'Way is wide for four horses in 
Stonewain  Valley  yonder,'  he waved his hand southwards;  'but  narrow  at 
beginning and at end.  Wild  Man could walk from here to Don between sunrise 
and noon.' 
     'Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders,' said  Jomer; 
'but  we must reckon rather on some ten hours for all. Things unforeseen may 
hinder us, and if our host is all strung out, it will be long  ere it can be 
set in order when we issue from the hills. What is the hour now?' 
     'Who knows?' said Thjoden. 'All is night now.' 
     'It is all dark, but  it is not all night.' said Ghvn.  'When Sun comes 
we   feel   her,  even  when  she   is  hidden.   Already  she  climbs  over  

####-East -mountains. It is the opening of day in the sky-fields.' 
     'Then  we must  set  out  as soon as may be,' said Jomer.  'Even so  we 
cannot hope to come to Gondor's aid today.' 
     Merry waited to  hear  no  more, but slipped away to get ready for  the 
summons to the march. This was  the last stage before the battle. It did not 
seem  likely to him  that  many of them would survive it. But he thought  of 
Pippin and the flames in Minas Tirith and thrust down his own dread. 
     All  went well that day, and no sight  or sound had  they  of the enemy 
waiting to waylay them. The Wild Men had put  out a screen  of wary hunters,  
so that no orc or roving spy should learn of the movements in the hills. The 
light was more dim  than ever as they drew nearer to  the  beleaguered city, 
and the Riders  passed  in long files like dark shadows  of men and  hor ses. 
Each  company  was guided by  a wild woodman; but old Ghvn walked beside 
the 
king. The  start had been slower than was  hoped, for it had  taken time for  
the Riders, walking and leading their horses, to find paths over the thickly 
wooded ridges behind   their camp  and down into the hidden Stonewain Valley. 
It was  late in the afternoon  when the leaders came  to wide  grey thickets 
stretching beyond the eastward side of  Amon Don, and masking a great gap in 
the line of hills that from Nardol to Don ran east and west. Through the gap 
the forgotten wain-road long ago had run down,  back into the main horse -way 
from the City  through Anurien; but now for many lives of men  trees had had 
their way with  it, and it had vanished, broken and buried under  the leaves 
of uncounted years. But  the  thickets offered to the Riders their last hope 
of cover before they went into open battle; for beyond them lay the road and 
the plains  of Anduin,  while east and southwards  the slopes  were bare and  
rocky,  as the writhen hills  gathered  themselves  together and climbed up, 
bastion upon bastion, into the great mass and shoulders of Mindolluin. 
     The leading company was halted, and as those behind filed up out of the 
trough of the Stonewain Valley they spread out  a nd passed to camping-places 
under the grey trees. The king  summoned the captains to council. Jomer sent 
out scouts to spy upon the road; but old Ghvn shook his head. 
     'No good to send Horse-men,' he said. 'Wild Men  have already  seen all 
that can be seen in the bad air. They will come soon and speak to me here.' 
     The  captains came;  and  then  out of  the  trees crept  warily  other  
p®kel-shapes so like old Ghvn that Merry  could hardly tell them apart. They 
spoke to Ghvn in a strange throaty language. 

####-     Presently Ghvn turned to the king. 'Wild Men say many things ' he said. 
'First, be wary! Still many  men in camp beyond Don, an hour's walk yonder,' 
he waved  his arm west  towards the black beacon. 'But  none  to see between 
here and Stone-folk's new walls. Many busy  there. Walls stand up no longer: 
gorgyn  knock them down with earth -thunder and with clubs of black iron. They 
are unwary and do not  look about  them. They think  their friends watch all  
roads!' At that old  Ghvn made a curious gurgling noise, and it seemed  that 
he was laughing. 
     'Good tidings!' cried Jomer. 'Even in this gloom hope gleams again. Our 
Enemy's devices  oft serve us in his  despite.  The accursed darkness itself 
has been a cloak to us. And now, lusting to destroy Gondor and throw it down 
stone from stone, his  orcs have  taken away  my greatest fear. The out-wall 
could have been held long against us. Now we  can sweep through - if once we 
win so far.' 
     'Once again I thank you, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn of  the woods,'  said  Thjoden.  
'Good fortune go with you for tidings and for guidance!' 
     'Kill  gorgyn! Kill orc-folk! No other words please Wild Men ' answered  
Ghvn. 'Drive away bad air and darkness with bright iron!' 
     'To do these things we have ridden far,'  said the king,  'and we shall 
attempt them. But what we shall achieve only tomorrow will show.' 
     Ghvn-buri-Ghvn  squatted down and touched the earth with his horny brow 
in token of farewell. Then he got up as if to depart.  But suddenly he stood 
looking u p like some startled  woodland  animal snuffling  a  strange air. A 
light came in his eyes.  
     'Wind  is  changing!' he cried, and  with  that, in a  twinkling as  it 
seemed, he and his fellows had vanished into the glooms, never to be seen by 
any Rider of Rohan again. Not long after far away  eastward  the faint drums 
throbbed again. Yet  to no heart in all the host came any fear that the Wild 
Men were unfaithful, strange and unlovely though they might appear. 
     'We need  no further  guidance,' said E lfhelm; 'for there are riders in 
the host who have ridden down to Mundburg in days of peace. I for  one. When 
we come to  the road it will veer south, and there will lie before  us still 
seven leagues ere we reach the wall of the townlands. Along most of that way 
there  is  much  grass  on  either side  of  the road. On that  stretch  the 
errand-riders of  Gondor reckoned to  make their greatest speed. We may ride 
it swiftly and without great rumour.' 
     'Then  since we  must  look  for  fell deeds and  the  need  of all our 

####-strength,' said Jomer,  'I  counsel that we  rest now, and set out hence  by 
night, and so  time our going that we come upon the fields  when tomorrow is 
as light as it will be, or when our lord gives the signal.' 
     To this the king  assented, and the captains departed. But soon Elfhelm 
returned.  'The scouts  have found naught  to  report beyond  the grey wood, 
lord,' he said, 'save two men only: two dead men and two dead horses.' 
     'Well?' said Jomer. 'What of it?' 
     'This, lord: they were errand-riders  of  Gondor; Hirgon was one maybe. 
At least his hand  still clasped  the Red Arrow, but his head was  hewn off. 
And this  also:  it would  seem by the signs that they were fleeing westward 
when they fell. As I read it, they found the enemy already on the  out-wall, 
or assailing it, when they  returned - and that would  be two nights ago, if 
they  used  fresh  horses  from the posts, as is their wont. They  could not 
reach the City and turned back.' 
     'Alas!' said  Thjoden. 'T hen  Denethor has heard  no news of our riding 
and will despair of our coming.' 
     'Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never,' said Jomer. 'And 
mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever before since  
men spoke with mouth.' 
     It was night. On either side of the  road the  host of Rohan was moving 
silently.  Now  the  road  passing  about the skirts  of  Mindolluin  turned 
southward. Far away and almost straight ahead there was a red glow under the 
black sky and  the sides of the great mountain  loomed dark against it. They  
were drawing near the Rammas of the Pelennor; but the day was not yet come. 
     The  king rode in the  midst  of the leading company, his household-men 
about him. Elfhelm's  jored came  next; and now Merry noticed  that  Dernhelm 
had left his place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward, until at 
last he was riding  just  in rear of the  king's guard. There came  a check. 
Merry  heard voices  in front speaking softly.  Out-riders had come back who 
had ventured forward almost to the wall. They came to the king. 
     'There are great  fires, lord,'  said one. 'The City is  all set  about 
with flame, and the field  is full of foes.  But all seem drawn off  to  the 
assault. As well as we could guess, there  are  few left  upon the out-wall, 
and they are heedless, busy in destruction.' 
     'Do you remember the  Wild Man's words,  lord?' said another.  'I  live 
upon the open Wold in days of peace;  Wndfara is my name, and to me also the 
air brings messages. Already the  wind  is turning. There comes a breath out 

####-of the South;  there  is a sea -tang in it, faint  though it be.  The morning 
will bring new things.  Above  the reek  it will  be dawn  when you pass the 
wall.' 
     'If  you speak truly, Wndfara, then  may  you live beyond  this day  in 
years of blessedness!' said Thjoden.  He turned to the  men of his household 
who were  near, and he spoke now  in a clear voice  so that many also of the 
riders of the first jored heard him: 
     'Now is the hour come, Riders of the Mark, sons  of Eorl! Foes and fire 
are before you,  and your homes far  behind.  Yet, though you fight upon  an 
alien field, the glory that you reap there shall be your own for ever. Oaths 
ye  have  taken:  now fulfil them  all,  to  lord  and  land  and league  of 
friendship!' 
     Men clashed spear upon shield. 
     'Jomer, my son! You  lead the first jored,' said Thjoden; 'and it shall 
go behind the king's banner in the centre. Elfhelm, lead your company to the 
right when we pass the wall.  And  Grimbold shall lead his towards the left. 
Let  the other companies behind follow these three that lead,  as  they have 
chance.  Strike wherever the  enemy gathers. Other plans we cannot make, for  
we know  not  yet  how things  stand upon the field.  Forth now, and fear no  
darkness!' 
     The leading company rode off as swiftly as they could, for it was still 
deep dark,  whatever change Wndfara  might forebode. Merry was riding 
behind 
Dernhelm,  clutching  with the  left hand  while  with the other he tried to 
loosen his sword in its sheath. He felt now  bitterly  the  truth of the old 
king's  words: in such  a battle what would you do Meriadoc?  Just this,' he 
thought: 'encumber a rider, and hope at best to stay in my  seat and  not be 
pounded to death by galloping hoofs!' 
     It was no  more than a  league  to where the out-walls had stood.  They 
soon reached them; too soon for  Merry. Wild cries broke out, and  there was 
some clash of arms, but it was brief. The orcs busy about the walls were few  
and amazed, and they were quickly  slain or driven off. Before the  ruin  of 
the north-gate  in the Rammas the king halted again. The first  jored drew up 
behind  him and about him on either side.  Dernhelm kept close to the  king,  
though Elfhelm's company was away on  the right. Grimbold's men turned 
aside 
and passed round to a great gap in the wall further eastward. 

####-     Merry peered from behind Dernhelm's  back. Far away, maybe ten miles or  
more, there was a great burning, but between it and the Riders lines of fire 
blazed in  a vast crescent, at the nearest point less than a league distant. 
He could make out little more on the dark plain,  and as yet he  neither saw 
any hope of morning, nor felt any wind, changed or unchanged. 
     Now silently the host of Rohan moved forward  into the field of Gondor,  
pouring in slowly but steadily, like the rising  tide through breaches in  a  
dike  that men  have  thought secure.  But  the  mind  and will of the Black  
Captain were bent wholly on the falling city, and   as yet no tidings came to 
him warning that his designs held any flaw. 
     After a while the  king led  his  men away somewhat  eastward, to  come 
between  the  fires  of  the siege  and the outer  fields. Still  they  were 
unchallenged,  and  still Thjoden gave  no signal. At last  he  halted  once 
again. The City was now nearer. A smell of burning was in the air and a very 
shadow  of  death.  The horses were uneasy. But the king sat upon  Snowmane, 
motionless, gazing upon the agony of Minas Tirith,  as i f  stricken suddenly 
by  anguish, or by  dread.  He  seemed to shrink  down, cowed by  age. Merry 
himself  felt as  if a great weight of horror and doubt had settled  on him. 
His  heart  beat slowly. Time  seemed poised in  uncertainty. They  were too 
late! Too late was worse  than never! Perhaps Thjoden would  quail,  bow his 
old head, turn, slink away to hide in the hills.  
     Then suddenly Merry felt  it at  last, beyond doubt: a change. Wind was 
in his face! Light was glimmering. Far, far  away, in  the  South the clouds 
could be dimly seen as remote grey shapes, rolling up, drifting: morning lay 
beyond them. 
     But at that same moment  there was a flash, as if lightning  had sprung 
from the earth beneath the City. For a searing second it stood dazzling  far 
off in black and white, its topmost tower like a glittering needle: and then 
as the darkness closed  again  there came rolling over  the fields  a  great 
boom. 
     At that sound  the bent shape  of the king sprang suddenly  erect. Tall 
and  proud he seemed again; and  rising in his  stirrups he  cried in a loud 
voice, more clear than any there had ever heard a mortal man achieve before: 
     Arise, arise, Riders of Thjoden! 
     Fell deeds awake: fire and slaughter! 
     spear shall be shaken, shie ld be splintered, 
     a sword-day, a red day, ere the sun rises! 

####-     Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor! 
     With that he seized a great horn from Guthlbf his banner -bearer, and he 
blew such a blast  upon it  that it burst asunder. And  straightway all  the 
horns in the host were lifted up in music, and the  blowing  of the horns of 
Rohan  in that  hour was like a  storm  upon the plain and  a thunder in the 
mountains.  
     Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor! 
     Suddenly the king cried to Snowmane and the  horse sprang away.  Behind 
him his banner  blew in the wind,  white horse upon a field of green, but he 
outpaced it. After  him thundered the knights of his house,  but he was ever  
before them.  Jomer rode there, the white horsetail on his  helm floating in 
his speed, and the front of the first jored roared like a breaker foaming to 
the shore, but Thjoden  could  not  be overtaken.  Fey  he  seemed,  or  the 
battle-fury of his fathers ran  like new tire in his veins, and he was borne 
up on Snowmane lik e a god of old, even as Oroml the  Great in the battle  of 
the Valar when the world was young. His golden shield was uncovered, and lo!  
it shone like an image of the Sun, and the grass flamed into green about the 
white feet of his steed. For morning came, morning and a  wind from the sea; 
and  the darkness was  removed, and the hosts  of Mordor wailed,  and terror  
took them, and they fled,  and died, and the hoofs of  wrath rode over them. 
And then all the host of Rohan burst into song, and they sang  as they slew,  
for the  joy of battle was on  them, and the sound of their singing that was 
fair and terrible came even to the City. 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. The Battle of the Pelennor 
Fields 

 
 
     But  it was  no  orc-chieftain or  brigand that led  the  assault  upon 
Gondor. The darkness was breaking too soon, before the date  that his Master 
had set for it:  fortune had betrayed him for  the moment, and the world had 
turned against him; victory was slipping from his grasp even as he stretched 
out his  hand  to seize it.  But  his arm was long. He was still  in command, 
wielding  great  powers. King, Ringwraith,  Lord of the Nazgyl, he  had many 
weapons. He left the Gate and vanished. 
     Thjoden  King of  the  Mark  had reached the road from the Gate to  the 
River, and he turned towards the City that was now less than a mile distant. 
He slackened his speed  a little, seeking new foes,  and  his  knights  came 
about him, and Dernhelm was with  them. Ahead nearer the walls Elfhelm's 
men 
were among the  siege-engines, hewing, slaying, driving their foes into  the 
fire-pits. Well nigh all the northern half of the Pelennor was overrun,  and 
there camps were  blazing, orcs were  flying towards  the  River like  herds 
before the hunters; and the Rohirrim went hither  and thither at their will. 
But they had not yet overthrown the siege, nor won the Gate. Many foes stood 
before  it, and on the  further  half of the  plain were  other hosts  still 
unfought. Southward beyond the road lay  the main force of the Haradrim, and 
there  their  horsemen were gathered about the standard of  their chieftain. 
And he looked  out, and in the growing light he saw the banner of  the king,  
and that  it was far  ahead of the battle with few men about it. Then he was 
filled with a  red wrath  and shouted aloud, and  displaying  his  standard, 
black serpent upon  scarlet, he  came against the white  horse and the green 
with great press of men; and  the  drawing of the scimitars of the Southrons 
was like a glitter of stars.  
     Then Thjoden was  aware of  him, and  would not wait for his onset, but 
crying to Snowmane he  charged headlong to greet him. Great was the clash of 
their  meeting. But the white fury  of the Northmen burned the  hotter,  and 
more skilled  was  their knighthood with long spears  and bitter. Fewer were 
they  but they  clove through the Southrons  like a fire-bolt  in  a forest. 
Right  through the press  drove  Thjoden Thengel's son,  and  his  spear was 

####-shivered as he threw down  their chieftain.  Out  swept  his sword,  and  he 
spurred  to  the  standard,  hewed staff  and bearer;  and the black serpent 
foundered. Then all that was left unslain of  their cavalry  turned and fled 
far away. 
     But  lo! suddenly in  the  midst of the glory  of the  king his  golden 
shield was dimmed. The new morning was blotted from the sky. Dark fell 
about 
him. Horses reared and screamed. Men cast  from the saddle lay grovelling on 
the ground. 
     'To  me!  To me!' cried Thjoden. 'Up Eorlingas!  Fear no darkness!' But 
Snowmane wild with terror stood up  on high, fighting with the air, and then 
with a great scream he crashed upon his side: a black dart had pierced  him. 
The king fell beneath him. 
     The great shadow  descended like a falling cloud. And behold!  it was a  
winged  creature: if bird, then  greater than all  other  birds, and it  was 
naked, and neither quill nor  feather did it bear, and its vast pinions were 
as webs of hide between horned fingers; and it stank. A creature of an older  
world maybe it  was,  whose  kind,  fingering  in  forgotten mountains  cold 
beneath the Moon,  outstayed their day,  and in hideous eyrie bred this last 
untimely brood, apt to evil. And the Dark  Lord took it, and nursed it  with 
fell meats, until  it grew beyond the measure of all  other things that fly; 
and he gave it to his servant to be his steed. Down, down it came, and then, 
folding its fingered webs, it gave a croaking cry, and settled upon the body 
of Snowmane, digging in its claws, stooping its long naked neck. 
     Upon it  sat a shape, black -mantled , huge and threatening. A  crown  of 
steel he bore, but between rim and robe naught was there to see, save only a  
deadly  gleam of eyes: the Lord  of the  Nazgyl. To the air he had returned, 
summoning  his  steed ere the darkness failed,  and now he was  come  again, 
bringing ruin,  turning hope to despair, and victory to death. A great black  
mace he wielded. 
     But Thjoden  was  not utterly forsaken. The  knights of  his house  lay 
slain about him, or else mastered by the madness of  their steeds were borne 
far away. Yet one stood  there still:  Dernhelm  the  young, faithful beyond 
fear; and he wept, for he had  loved his lord as a father. Right through the 
charge Merry had  been borne unharmed behind him, until the Shadow came; 
and 
then  Windfola  had thrown  them in his terror, and now  ran  wild upon  the 

####-plain. Merry crawled on all fours like a dazed beast, and  such a horror was 
on him that he was blind and sick. 
     'King's man! King's man!' his heart cried within him. 'You must stay by 
him. As a father you shall be to me, you said.' But his will made no answer, 
and his body shook. He dared not open his eyes or look up. 
     Then out of the blackness in his mind he thought that he heard Dernhelm 
speaking; yet now the voice seemed strange, recalling  some other voice  that 
he had known. 
     'Begone, foul dwimmerlaik, lord of carrion! Leave the dead in peace!' 
     A cold voice answered: 'Come not between the Nazgyl and his prey! Or he 
will not slay thee  in thy turn. He  will  bear  thee away to the houses  of 
lamentation, beyond all darkness, where thy flesh shall be devoured, and thy 
shrivelled mind be left naked to the Lidless Eye.' 
     A sword rang as it was drawn. 'Do what you will; but  I will hinder it, 
if I may.' 
     'Hinder me? Thou fool. No living man may hinder me!' 
     Then  Merry heard of all sounds in that  hour the  strangest. It seemed 
that Dernhelm laughed, and the clear voice was like the  ring of steel. 'But 
no living man am I! You look upon a  woman.  Jowyn I am, Jomund's  
daughter. 
You  stand  between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not deathless!  
For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him.' 
     The winged creature screamed at her, but the Ringwraith made no answer, 
and was silent, as if in sudden doubt. Very amazement for a moment conquered 
Merry's fear. He  opened his  eyes  and the  blackness was lifted from them. 
There some paces from him sat the great beast, and all seemed dark about it, 
and above  it loomed the  Nazgyl Lord like a shadow of despa ir.  A little to 
the left facing them stood she whom he had called Dernhelm. But the  helm of 
her  secrecy,  had fallen from  her, and her bright  hair, released from its 
bonds, gleamed with pale gold upon  her shoulders. Her eyes  grey as the sea 
were  hard  and fell, and yet tears were  on  her cheek. A sword was in  her  
hand, and she raised her shield against the horror of her enemy's eyes.  
     Jowyn  it  was,  and  Dernhelm  also. For into Merry's mind flashed the 
memory of the face that he saw at the riding from Dunharrow: the face of one 
that goes seeking death, having no  hope. Pity  filled his heart  and  great 
wonder, and suddenly the slow-kindled courage of his race awoke. He clenched 
his hand. She should not die, so fair, so desperate At  least she should not 

####-die alone, unaided. 
     The face of their enemy was not turned towards him, but still he hardly 
dared  to move,  dreading lest  the deadly eyes should fall  on him. Slowly, 
slowly he began to crawl aside; but the Black  Captain, in doubt  and malice 
intent upon the woman before him, heeded him no more than a worm in the 
mud. 
     Suddenly the great beast beat its hideous  wings, and the  wind of them 
was foul.  Again it  leaped into the  air, and then  swiftly fell  down upon 
Jowyn, shrieking, striking with beak and claw.  
     Still  she  did  not blench:  maiden of  the Rohirrim, child of  kings,  
slender but as a steel -blade, fair but terrible.  A  swift stroke she dealt, 
skilled and deadly.  The outstretched neck she clove asunder,  and the  hewn 
head fell like a stone.  Backward she sprang  as the huge  shape  crashed to 
ruin, vast wings outspread,  crumpled on the  earth; and with  its fall  the 
shadow passed  away. A light  fell about her,  and  her  hair  shone  in the 
sunrise. 
     Out of the  wreck rose the Black  Rider, tall and threatening, towering 
above her. With  a cry of hatred that stung the very ears  like venom he let 
fall  his mace. Her  shield was  shivered  in  many pieces, and her  arm was 
broken; she stumbled to her knees. He bent  over  her like  a cloud, and his 
eyes glittered; he raised his mace to kill. 
     But suddenly he too stumbled forward with a cry of bitter pain, and his 
stroke went  wide,  driving into the ground.  Merry's  sword had stabbed him 
from behind, shearing  through  the black mantle, and passing up beneath the 
hauberk had pierced the sinew behind his mighty knee. 
     'Jowyn! Jowyn!'  cried  Merry.  Then tottering, struggling up, with her  
last strength she drove her sword between  crown and  mantle, as  the  great 
shoulders bowed before her. The sword broke sparkling into many shards.  The 
crown rolled away with  a clang. Jowyn fell forward upon her fallen foe. But 
lo! the mantle and hauberk were empty. Shapeless they lay now on the ground, 
torn and tumbled; and a cry went up into the shuddering air, and faded  to a  
shrill wailing, passing with  the wind, a voice bodiless and thin that died,  
and was swallowed up, and was never heard again in that age of this world. 
     And there stood Meriadoc the hobbit in the midst of the slain, blinking 
like an owl in  the daylight, for  tears blinded him; and through  a mist he 
looked on Jowyn's fair head, as  she lay and did not move; and  he looked on 
the face of the king, fallen in the midst  of his glory, For Snowmane in his 

####-agony had rolled away from him again; yet he was the bane of his master. 
     Then  Merry stooped and  lifted his hand to kiss  it,  and  lo! Thjoden 
opened  his eyes, and they were clear, and he spoke in a quiet voice  though  
laboured. 
     'Farewell, Master Holbytla!'  he said. 'My body  is broken. I go to  my 
fathers.  And  even  in their mighty  company  I shall not now be ashamed. I  
felled the black serpent. A grim morn, and a glad day, and a golden sunset!' 
     Merry could  not speak, bu t wept anew. 'Forgive me,  lord,' he  said at 
last, 'if  I broke  your command, and  yet have done no more in your service 
than to weep at our parting.' 
     The old king smiled. 'Grieve not! It is forgiven. Great  heart will not 
be denied. Live now  in blessedness; and when  you  sit  in peace with  your  
pipe, think  of  me! For  never now shall I  sit with you in Meduseld,  as I 
promised, or listen to your herb-lore.' He closed his eyes, and Merry  bowed  
beside him. Presently  he spoke again. 'Where is  Jomer? For my eyes darken, 
and I would see him ere I go.  He must be  king after  me. And  I would send  
word to Jowyn. She, she would not have me leave her, and now I shall not see 
her again, dearer than daughter.' 
     'Lord,  lord,' began Merry brokenly, 'she  is--';  but  at that  moment 
there  was  a  great clamour, and all  about  them horns and  trumpets  were 
blowing. Merry looked round:  he had forgotten  the war, and  all  the world 
beside, and many hours it  seemed since the king rode to his fall, though in 
truth it was only a little while. But now he saw that they were in danger of 
being caught  in  the  very midst  of the great  battle that would  soon  be 
joined. 
     New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the River;  and  
from  u nder the walls came  the  legions of Morgul; and  from  the southward 
fields came footmen of Harad with horsemen before them, and behind them 
rose 
the huge backs of the mymakil with war-towers  upon them. But  northward the 
white crest of Jomer led the great front of  the Rohirrim which he had again 
gathered and marshalled;  and out of the City  came all the  strength of men 
that  was in  it, and  the silver swan of Dol Amroth was borne  in  the van, 
driving the enemy from the Gate. 
     For  a  moment  the thought flitted through  Merry's  mind:  'Where  is 
Gandalf? Is he not here? Could he not  have saved the  king and Jowyn?'  But 
thereupon Jomer rode  up  in haste, and with him  came the  knights  of  the 

####-household that still lived and had now mastered their horses. They looked in 
wonder  at  the carcase of the fell  beast that lay there:  and their steeds 
would  not go near. But Jomer leaped from the  saddle, and  grief and dismay 
fell upon him as he came to the king's side and stood there in silence. 
     Then one of the knights took the king's banner from the hand of Guthlbf 
the banner -bearer who  lay  dead, and he lifted it up. Slowly Thjoden opened 
his eyes. Seeing the banner he made a sign that it should be given to Jomer. 
     'Hail, King of  the Mark!' he said.  'Ride now  to  victory!  Bid Jowyn 
farewell!' And so he died,  and knew  not that Jowyn lay near him. And those 
who stood by wept, crying: 'Thjoden King! Thjoden King!' 
     But Jomer said to them: 
     Mourn not overmuch! Mighty was the fallen, 
     meet was his ending. When his mound is raised, 
     women then shall weep. War now calls us! 
     Yet  he himself wept  as he spoke.  'Let  his knights remain  here,' he 
said; 'and bear his body in honour from the field, lest the battle ride over  
it! Yea, and all these other of the king's men that lie here.' And he looked 
at  the  slain,  recalling their  names. Then suddenly he beheld  his sister  
Jowyn as she lay, and he knew her. He stood a moment as a man who is 
pierced 
in the midst of a cry by  an arrow through the heart;  and then his face went 
deathly white;  and a cold  fury rose in him, so that  all speech failed him 
for a while. A fey mood took him. 
     'Jowyn,  Jowyn!'  he  cried at last:  'Jowyn,  how come you  here? What 
madness or devilry is this? Death, death, death! Death take us all!' 
     Then without taking  counsel or waiting for the approach of  the men of 
the City, he spurred headlong back  to the front of the great host, and blew 
a horn, and cried  aloud for  the onset. Over the field rang his clear voice 
calling: 'Death! Ride, ride to ruin and the world's ending!' 
     And with that the host  began to move. But the Rohirrim sang  no  more. 
Death  they cried with one voice loud and terrible, and gathering speed  like 
a  great tide their battle swept about their fallen king and passed, roaring 
away southwards.  
     And still  Meriadoc  the hobbit stood there blinking through  his tears 
and no one spoke to him, indeed none seemed to heed him. He brushed away 
the 
tears, and stooped to pick up the green shield that Jowyn had given him; and 

####-he slung it at his back.  Then he looked for his sword that he had let fall; 
for even as he struck his blow his arm was numbed, and now he could only use 
his left hand. And behold! there  lay his weapon, but the blade  was smoking  
like a dry branch that has been thrust in  a fire; and as  he watched it, it 
writhed and withered and was consumed. 
     So passed the sword  of the Barrow-downs, work of Westernesse. But glad 
would  he have been  to know its fate who wrought  it slowly long ago in the  
North-kingdom when the D®nedain were young,  and chief among  their foes 
was 
the dread realm of Angmar and its sorcerer king. No other blade, not  though 
mightier hands had wielded it, would have dealt that foe a wound  so bitter, 
cleaving the undead flesh, breaking the spell that knit his unseen sinews to 
his will. 
     Men now raised the  king, and laying cloaks upon  spear -truncheons they 
made shift to bear him away towards the City; and others lifted Jowyn gently 
up and bore her after him.  But  the  men of the king's household they could 
not yet bring from  the  field; for seven of the king's knights  had  fallen 
there, and Djorwine their chief was among them. So they laid them apart from 
their foes and the fell beast and set spears about them. And afterwards when 
all was over men returned  and  made a fire there  and burned the carcase of 
the beast; but for Snowmane  they dug a grave and set up a stone  upon which 
was carved in the tongues of Gondor and the Mark: 
     Faithful servant yet master's bane 
     Lightfoot's foal, swift Snowmane. 
     Green and long  grew the grass  on  Snowmane's Howe, but ever black and 
bare was the ground where the beast was burned. 
     Now slowly and sadly Merry  walked beside the bearers,  and he gave  no 
more  heed to  the battle.  He was weary and  full  of  pain, and  his limbs 
trembled as  with  a chill. A great  rain came out of the Sea, and it seemed 
that all things wept for Thjoden and  Jowyn, quenching the fires in the City 
with grey tears.  It was through a mist that presently he saw the van of the 
men of Gondor  approaching. Imrahil,  Prince of Dol Amroth, rode up and 
drew 
rein before them. 
     'What burden do you bear, Men of Rohan?' he cried. 
     'Thjoden King,' they answered. 'He is dead. But Jomer King now rides in  
the battle: he with the white crest in the wind.' 

####-     Then the prince went from his horse, and knelt by the bier in honour of 
the  king and  his  great onset; and  he wept. And  rising he looked then on 
Jowyn and  was amazed. 'Surely,  here  is a  woman?' he said. 'Have even the 
women of the Rohirrim come to war in our need?' 
     'Nay!  One only,'  they  answered.  'The Lady Jowyn is  she, sister  of 
Jomer; and we knew naught of her riding  until this hour, and greatly we rue 
it.' 
     Then the prince seeing her beauty, though her face  was pale  and cold, 
touched her hand as he bent to look more  closely on her. 'Men of Rohan!' he 
cried. 'Are there no leeches among you? She is hurt to the death  maybe, but 
I deem that  she yet lives.' And  he held the bright-burnished vambrace that 
was upon his arm before her cold tips, and behold! a little mist was laid on 
it hardly to be seen. 
     'Haste now is needed,'  he said, and he sent one riding back swiftly to 
the City to bring aid. But he bowing low to the fallen, bade  them farewell, 
and mounting rode away into battle. 
     And now  the  fighting waxed furious on the fields of the Pelennor; and 
the din of arms rose upon  high, with  the crying of men and the neighing of 
horses. Horns were blown  and trumpets  were  braying, and  the mymakil were 
bellowing as they  were goaded to war. Under the south walls of the City the  
footmen of Gondor now  drove against the legions  of Morgul that were  still  
gathered there in strength. But the horsemen rode eastward to the succour of 
Jomer:  H®rin the Tall Warden of  the Keys, and the Lord of  Lossarnach, and 
Hirluin of the Green Hills, and Prince Imrahil the fair with his knights all 
about him. 
     Not too  soon came  their  aid to  the Rohirrim; for fortune had turned 
against Jomer,  and his fury had betrayed him.  The great wrath of his onset 
had  utterly  overthrown the front of  his enemies, and  great wedges of his 
Riders had passed clear through  the ranks of  the   Southrons,  discomfiting 
their  horsemen and riding their footmen to ruin.  But  wherever the mymakil 
came  there the horses would not go, but  blenched and swerved away; and the 
great  monsters were  unfought, and  stood  like towers of defence,  and the 
Haradrim rallied about them. And if the Rohirrim at  their onset were thrice 
outnumbered by  the Haradrim alone,  soon their case  became  worse; for new 
strength came  now streaming to the field  out of  Osgiliath. There they had 
been mustered for the sack of  the City and the rape of Gondor,  waiting  on  
the call of their Captain. He  now was destroyed; but Gothmog the lieutenant 

####-of  Morgul had flung them into the fray; Easterlings  with axes, and Variags 
of  Khand. Southrons  in  scarlet, and  out  of  Far  Harad  black  men  like 
half-trolls with white eyes and red tongues. Some now hastened up behind the 
Rohirrim, others  held westward to hold off the forces of Gondor and prevent 
their joining with Rohan. 
     It was even as the day thus began to turn against Gondor and their hope 
wavered that a new cry went up in the City, it being  then midmorning, and a 
great wind blowing,  and the rain flying north, and the sun shining. In that 
clear air watchmen on the walls saw afar a new sight of fear, and their last 
hope left them. 
     For Anduin, from the bend at  the Harlond, so flowed that from the City 
men  could look down it lengthwise for  some leagues,  and  the  far-sighted  
could  see  any  ships  that  approached. And looking thither they cried  in  
dismay; for black against the glittering stream they beheld a fleet borne up 
on the wind: dromunds, and  ships  of great draught with many oars, and with 
black sails bellying in the breeze. 
     'The Corsairs of Umbar!' men shouted. 'The Corsairs of Umbar! Look! The 
Corsairs of Umbar  are  coming!  So  Belfalas is  taken, and the  Ethir, and 
Lebennin is gone. The Corsairs are upon us! It is the last stroke of doom!' 
     And some without order, for none could he found to command them  in the 
City,  ran to  the bells and tolled the alarm;  and  some blew the  trumpets 
sounding the retreat. 'Back to the walls!' they  cried. 'Back to the  walls!  
Come back to the City before all are overwhelmed!' But the  wind  that  sped 
the ships blew all their clamour away. 
     The Rohirrim indeed had no  need  of news or  alarm.  All too well they 
could  see for themselves the black sails. For Jomer was now scarcely a mile  
from the Harlond, and a great press of  his first  foes was between  him and 
the haven  there, while new  foes came swirling behind, cutting him off from 
the Prince. Now he looked to the River,  and hope died in his heart, and the 
wind  that he had blessed  he  now  called accursed. But the hosts of Mordor  
were enheartened, and filled  with a new lust  and fury they came yelling to 
the onset. 
     Stern now  was Jomer's mood, and  his mind clear again. He let blow the 
horns to rally all men to his banner that could come thither; for he thought 
to make a great shield-wall at the last, and stand, and  fight there on foot 
till all fell, and do deeds of song on the fields of Pelennor, though no man 
should be left in the West to remember the last King of the Mark. So he rode  

####-to  a green hillock and  there  set  his banner,  and  the  White Horse  ran 
rippling in the wind. 
     Out of doubt, out of dark to the day's rising 
     I came singing in the sun, sword unsheathing. 
     To hope's end I rode and to heart's breaking: 
     Now for wrath, now for ruin and a red nightfall! 
     These staves  he spoke, yet he laughed as  he  said them. For once more 
lust of battle was on him; and he was still unscathed, and he was young, and 
he was king:  the  lord  of a  fell  people. And lo! even  as he  laughed at 
despair he looked  out  again on the black ships, and he lifted up his sword 
to defy them. 
     And then wonder took him, and a great joy; and he cast  his sword up in 
the sunlight  and sang as he caught it. And all eyes followed his gaze,  and 
behold!  upon  the  foremost  ship  a great  standard  broke,  and the  wind 
displayed it as she turned towards the Harlond. There flowered a White Tree, 
and that  was for Gondor; but Seven Stars were  about it,  and  a high crown 
above it,  the  signs of  Elendil  that no lord had  borne  for years beyond 
count. And the  stars flamed in the  sunlight, for they were wrought of gems 
by Arwen daughter of Elrond; and the crown was bright in the morning, for it 
was wrought of mithril and gold. 
     Thus came Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elessar, Isildur's heir, out  of the 
Paths of the Dead, borne upon a wind from the Sea to the  kingdom of Gondor; 
and the mirth  of the Rohirrim was a  torrent  of laughter and a flashing of 
swords, and the  joy and wonder of the  City  was a music of trumpets and  a  
ringing of bells. But the hosts of Mordor wer e seized with bewilderment, and 
a  great  wizardry  it seemed to  them that their own ships should be filled 
with their foes; and a black dread  fell on them, knowing  that the tides of 
fate had turned against them and their doom was at hand. 
     East rode the  knights of  Dol Amroth driving the  enemy  before  them: 
troll-men and Variags  and orcs that hated  the sunlight. South strode Jomer  
and men fled  before his face, and  they were caught between the  hammer and 
the anvil. For now men leaped from the ships to the quays of the Harlond and 
swept north like  a storm. There  came Legolas, and  Gimli wielding his axe, 
and Halbarad with the standard, and Elladan  and Elrohir with stars on their 
brow,  and the  dour-handed D®nedain, Rangers of the North,  leading a great 
valour of the folk of Lebennin  and Lamedon and  the fiefs of the South. But 
before all went Aragorn with the Flame of the West, And®ril  like a new fire 

####-kindled, Narsil  re-forged  as deadly as of old: and upon his  brow  was the 
Star of Elendil. 
     And so at length Jomer and Aragorn met in  the midst of the battle, and 
they leaned on their swords and looked on one another and were glad. 
     'Thus we  meet again, though  all the hosts of Mordor lay between  us,' 
said Aragorn. 'Did I not say so at the Hornburg?' 
     'So you spoke,' said Jomer, 'but hope oft deceives, and I knew not then 
that you were a man foresighted. Yet twice blessed is help unlooked for, and  
never was a meeting of friends more joyful.' And they  clasped hand in hand. 
'Nor  indeed more timely,'  said Jomer. 'You come none too soon,  my friend. 
Much loss and sorrow has befallen us.' 
     'Then let us avenge it, ere  we speak  of it!'  said Aragorn,  and they 
rode back to battle together. 
     Hard  fighting and long  labour they had  still; for the Southrons were 
bold  men and grim, and fierce in despair; and  the Easterlings  were strong 
and war-hardened and asked for no quarter. And so in this place and that, by 
burned  homestead or  barn,  upon hillock or mound, under wa ll or on  field,  
still they gathered and rallied and fought until the day wore away. 
     Then the Sun went at last behind Mindolluin and filled all the sky with 
a great  burning, so  that  the hills and the mountains were  dyed  as  with 
blood; fire  glowed in  the  River, and the grass of the Pelennor lay red in 
the nightfall. And in that hour the great Battle of  the field of Gondor was 
over; and not one living foe was left within  the circuit of the Rammas. All 
were slain  save those who fled  to die, or to drown  in the red foam of the 
River. Few ever came  eastward to Morgul or Mordor; and  to the land of  the 
Haradrim came only a tale from far off: a rumour of  the wrath and terror of 
Gondor. 
     Aragorn and  Jomer and Imrahil rode back towards  the Gate of the City,  
and they  were now weary beyond joy  or sorrow. These three were  unscathed, 
for such was their  fortune and the skill  and might of their  arms, and few 
indeed had dared  to abide them or  look on their faces in the hour of their 
wrath. But many others were hurt or  maimed or dead upon the field. The axes 
hewed Forlong  as he fought  alone and unhorsed; and both Duilin of Morthond 
and his  brother  were  trampled  to death  when they assailed the  mymakil, 
leading  their  bowmen  close  to shoot at the eyes of the monsters. Neither 
Hirluin the  fair would return to Pinnath Gelin, nor Grimbold  to Grimslade,  
nor Halbarad  to  the Northlands,  dour -handed  Ranger.  No few  had fallen, 

####-renowned or nameless, captain or  soldier; for it was a great battle and the 
full count of it  no tale has told. So long afterward a maker in Rohan  said 
in his song of the Mounds of Mundburg: 
     We heard of the horns in the hills ringing, 
     the swords shining in the South -kingdom. 
     Steeds went striding to the Stoningland 
     as wind in the morning. War was kindled. 
     There Thjoden fell, Thengling mighty, 
     to his golden halls and green pastures 
     in the Northern fields never returning, 
     high lord of the host. Harding and Guthlbf 
     D®nhere and Djorwine, doughty Grimbold, 
     Herefara and Herubrand, Horn and Fastred, 
     fought and fell there in a far country: 
     in the Mounds of Mundburg under mould they lie  
     with their league-fellows, lords of Gondor. 
     Neither Hirluin the Fair to the hills by the sea, 
     nor Forlong the old to the flowering vales 
     ever, to Arnach, to his own country 
     returned in triumph; nor the tall bowmen, 
     Derufin and Duilin, to their dark waters, 
     meres of Morthond under mountain -shadows. 
     Death in the morning and at day's ending  
     lords took and lowly. Long now they sleep 
     under grass in Gondor by the Great River. 
     Grey now as tears, gleaming silver, 
     red then it rolled, roaring water: 
     foam dyed with blood flamed a t sunset; 
     as beacons mountains burned at evening; 
     red fell the dew in Rammas Echor. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. The Pyre of Denethor 

 
 
     When the dark shadow at the Gate withdrew Gandalf still sat motionless.  
But Pippin rose to his  feet, as if a great weight had been lifted from him; 
and  he stood listening to  the horns, and it seemed to  him that they would 
break his  heart  with joy. And  never in after years could  he  hear a horn 
blown in the distance  without tears starting in  his eyes. But now suddenly 
his errand  returned  to  his memory,  and  he  ran forward.  At that moment 
Gandalf stirred and spoke to Shadowfax, and was  about to  ride through  the 
Gate. 
     'Gandalf, Gandalf! ' cried Pippin, and Shadowfax halted. 
     'What are you  doing here?'  said Gandalf. 'Is it not a law in the City 
that  those who  wear the black and  silver must stay in the Citadel, unless 
their lord gives them leave?' 
     'He has,' said Pippin. 'He sent me away. But I am frightened. Something 
terrible may happen up  there. The  Lord is  out of his  mind, I think. I am 
afraid he will kill himself, and kill Faramir too. Can't you do something?' 
     Gandalf looked through the  gaping  Gate, and already  on the fields he 
heard the gathering sound of  battle. He clenched his  hand. 'I must go ' he 
said. 'The Black Rider is abroad, and he will yet  bring ruin on  us. I have 
no time.' 
     'But Faramir!' cried Pippin.  'He is  not dead, and they will  burn him 
alive, if someone does not stop them.' 
     'Burn him alive?' said Gandalf. 'What is this tale? Be quick!' 
     'Denethor  has gone  to  the  Tombs,'  said Pippin, 'and  he has  taken 
Faramir, and  he says we are all to burn, and he will not wait, and they are 
to make a pyre and  burn him on it, and Faramir as well. And he has sent men 
to fetch  wood and  oil.  And I have told Beregond, but I'm afraid  he won't  
dare  to  leave his post: he is on  guard. And what can  he  do  anyway?' So 
Pippin poured out  his tale, reaching up  and  touching  Gandalf's knee with 
trembling hands. 'Can't you save Faramir?' 
     'Maybe I can,' said Gandalf;  'but  if  I do, then  others will die,  I 
fear. Well, I must come, since no  other  help can  reach  him. But evil and 
sorrow will come of this. Even in the heart of our stronghold the Enemy  has 
power to strike us: for his will it is that is at work.' 

####-     Then  having made up  his mind he acted swiftly; and catching up Pippin 
and setting him before him, he turned Shadowfax with a word. Up the climbing 
streets of Minas  Tirith they clattered, while the noise of  war rose behind 
them. Everywhere men were rising from their despair and dread, seizing their 
weapons, crying  one to another: 'Rohan  has come!'  Captains were shouting, 
companies were mustering; many already were marching down to the Gate. 
     They  met  the Prince Imrahil,  and  he called  to them: 'Whither  now, 
Mithrandir?  The Rohirrim are  fighting  on  the  fields  of Gondor! We must  
gather all the strength that we can find.' 
     'You will need every man and more,' said  Gandalf.  'Make  all haste. I 
will come when I can. But I  have  an errand to the  Lord Denethor that will 
not wait. Take command in the Lord's absence!' 
     They passed on; and  as they climbed and drew near to the Citadel  they 
felt the wind blowing in their faces, and they caught the glimmer of morning  
far away, a light growing in the southern sky. But it brought little hope to 
them, not knowing what evil lay before them, fearing to come too late. 
     'Darkness is passing,' said Gandalf, 'but it still lies heavy  on  this 
City.' 
     At the  gate  of the  Citadel they found no guard.  'Then Beregond  has 
gone,' said  Pippin  more hopefully. They turned away and hastened along the 
road to  the Closed Door. It stood wide open,  and the porter lay before it. 
He was slain and his key had been taken. 
     'Work of the Enemy!' said Gandalf. 'Such  deeds he loves: friend at war 
with friend; loyalty divided in  confusion of hearts.' Now he dismounted and 
bade  Shadowfax return to his stable. 'For, my friend,' he said, 'you and  I 
should have ridden to  the fields long  ago, but other matters delay me. Yet 
come swiftly if I call!' 
     They passed the Door  and walked on down the steep winding  road. Light 
was  growing, and the tall columns and carven  figures beside the  way  went 
slowly by like grey ghosts.  
     Suddenly the silence was broken,  and  they  heard below them cries and  
the ringing of swords: such  sounds as had not been  heard in  the  hallowed 
places since the building of  the City. At  last they came to Rath Dnnen and 
hastened towards the  House of the Stewards,  looming in the  twilight under  
its great dome. 
     'Stay!  Stay!'  cried Gandalf,  springing  forward  to the stone  stair 
before the door. 'Stay this madness!' 

####-     For there were  the servants of  Denethor with  swords and  torches  in 
their hands; but  alone in the  porch upon  the topmost step stood Beregond, 
clad in the black and silver of  the  Guard;  and he held  the door  against 
them. Two of them had already fallen to his sword, staining the hallows with 
their blood;  and the others cursed  him, calling him outlaw and  traitor to 
his master. 
     Even  as Gandalf and  Pippin  ran forward,  they heard from  within the 
house of the dead  the voice of Denethor crying: 'Haste, haste! Do as I have 
bidden!  Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself?' Thereupon  the door  
which Beregond held  shut  with  his left  hand was wrenched open, and there 
behind him stood the Lord of the City, tall and fell; a light like flame was 
in his eyes, a nd he held a drawn sword. 
     But Gandalf sprang up  the steps, and  the men fell  back from  him and 
covered their eyes; for his  coming  was like the incoming of a  white light 
into  a dark place, and he came with great anger. He lifted up his hand, and 
in  the very stroke, the sword of Denethor flew  up and left  his  grasp and 
fell  behind him in the shadows of the house; and  Denethor stepped backward 
before Gandalf as one amazed. 
     'What is this, my lord?' said the wizard. 'The houses  of the  dead are 
no  places for the living.  And why  do men  fight here in the  Hallows when 
there  is  war enough before  the  Gate? Or has our  Enemy come even to Rath 
Dnnen?' 
     'Since  when  has  the Lord  of  Gondor been answerable to thee?'  said 
Denethor.  'Or may I not command my own servants?' 
     'You may,' said Gandalf.  'But others may contest your will, when it is 
turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?' 
     'He lies  within,' said Denethor, 'burning, already burning. They  have 
set a fire in his flesh. But soon all shall be burned. The  West has failed. 
It shall  all  go up in a  great fire, and all shall be  ended. Ash! Ash and 
smoke blown away on the wind!' 
     Then  Gandalf  seeing the madness  that was on  him feared that he  had 
already done some evil deed, and he thrust forward, with Beregond and Pippin 
behind him, while Denethor gave back until he stood beside the table within. 
But  there they found Faramir,  still dreaming in  his fever, lying upon the 
table. Wood was piled under it, and high all about it, and all  was drenched 
with oil, even the garments of Faramir and the coverlets; but as yet no fire 
had been set to the fuel. Then Gandalf revealed the strength that lay hid in 

####-him; even as the light of  his  power was hidden u nder his  grey mantle.  He 
leaped up on to the faggots, and raising the sick man lightly he sprang down 
again, and bore him towards the door. But as he did  so  Faramir moaned  and 
called on his father in his dream. 
     Denethor started as one waking from a trance, and the flame died in his 
eyes,  and he wept; and he said: 'Do not take my son from me!  He calls  for  
me.' 
     'He calls,' said Gandalf, 'but you cannot come to him yet.  For he must  
seek healing on the threshold of death, and maybe find it no t. Whereas  your  
part is to go out to  the battle of your City, where maybe death awaits you. 
This you know in your heart.' 
     'He will not wake again,' said Denethor. 'Battle is vain. Why should we 
wish to live longer? Why should we not go to death side by side?' 
     'Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the hour of 
your  death,'  answered  Gandalf.  'And only the  heathen  kings, under  the 
domination of the Dark Power, did  thus,  slaying  themselves  in pride  and 
despair, murdering their kin to ease their  own death.' Then passing through 
the door he took  Faramir from the deadly house and laid him  on the bier on  
which he had been brought, and which had now been set in the porch. Denethor  
followed him, and  stood trembling,  looking with longing on the face of his 
son. And for a moment, while all were silent and still, watching the Lord in 
his throes, he wavered. 
     'Come!' said  Gandalf.  'We  are needed. There is much that you can yet 
do.' 
     Then suddenly Denethor laughed . He stood up  tall  and proud again, and 
stepping swiftly back to the table he lifted from it the pillow on which his 
head  had lain.  Then coming to the  doorway he drew aside the covering, and 
lo! he had between his hands  a palantnr. And as he held it up, it seemed to 
those that  looked on that the  globe began to  glow with an inner flame, so 
that the lean face of the Lord was lit as with a red fire, and it seemed cut 
out of hard stone, sharp with black shadows, noble, proud, and terrible. His 
eyes glittered. 
     'Pride and despair!' he cried.  'Didst thou  think that the eyes of the 
White  Tower were blind? Nay, I have seen more than thou knowest, Grey 
Fool. 
For  thy hope is  but ignorance. Go then and labour in healing! Go forth and  
fight! Vanity. For a little space you may triumph  on the field, for a  day. 

####-But against the Power that now arises there is no victory. To this City only 
the first finger of its hand has yet been stretched. All the East is moving. 
And even now the  wind of thy  hope cheats thee and wafts up Anduin a  fleet 
with black  sails. The West has failed. It is  time for all  to  depart  who 
would not be slaves.' 
     'Such  counsels  will make the  Enemy's victory  certain  indeed,' said 
Gandalf. 
     'Hope on then!' laughed Denethor. 'Do  I not know thee, Mithrandir? Thy  
hope is to rule in my stead, to stand behind every throne,  north, south, or  
west. I  have read  thy  mind  and  its  policies.  Do I  not  know that you  
commanded this halfling here to keep silence? That you brought him hither to 
be a spy  within  my  very  chamber?  And yet  in our speech together I have 
learned  the names and purpose of all thy companions. So! With the left hand 
thou wouldst use me  for a little while as a shield against Mordor, and with 
the right bring up this Ranger of the North to supplant me. 
     'But  I say to thee, Gandalf Mithrandir, I will not  be  thy tool! I am 
Steward of the  House  of Anbrion.  I will not step  down  to be  the dotard 
chamberlain of an upstart. Even  were his claim proved to me, still he comes 
but of the line of Isildur. I will not bow to such a  one, last of  a ragged 
house long bereft of lordship and dignity.' 
     'What then would  you have,' said Gandalf, 'if your will could have its 
way?' 
     'I would have things as they were in all the days of my life,' answered 
Denethor,  'and in the days of  my  longfathers before me: to be the Lord of 
this City in peace,  and leave my chair to  a son after me, who would be his 
own master and no wizard's pupil. But if doom denies this to me, then I will 
have naught: neither life diminished, nor love halved, nor honour abated.' 
     'To me it would  not seem that a Steward who  faithfully surrenders his 
charge is diminished in love  or in honour,' said Gandalf. 'And at the least 
you shall not rob your son of his choice while his death is still in doubt.' 
     At those words Denethor's eyes flamed again, and taking the Stone under  
his arm  he drew a knife and  strode towards the  bier. But  Beregond sprang 
forward and set himself before Faramir. 
     'So!' cried Denethor. 'Thou hadst  already  stolen  half my son's love. 
Now thou stealest the hearts of  my knights also, so that they rob me wholly  
of my son at the last. But in this at least thou shalt not defy  my will: to 
rule my own end.' 

####-     'Come  hither!'  he cried  to his servants. 'Come,  if you are  not all 
recreant!'  Then two of them ran up the steps to  him. Swiftly he snatched a  
torch from the hand of  one  and  sprang back into the house. Before Gandalf 
could hinder him he  thrust the brand amid the fuel, and at once it crackled 
and roared into flame. 
     Then Denethor  leaped upon  the  table, and  standing there wreathed in 
fire and smoke he took up the staff  of his stewardship that lay at his feet 
and broke  it on his  knee.  Casting the pieces into  the blaze he bowed and 
laid himself  on  the table, clasping the palantnr with both hands upon  his 
breast. And  it was said that ever after, if  any man  looked in that Stone, 
unless he had a great strength of will to  turn it to other purpose, he  saw 
only two aged hands withering in flame. 
     Gandalf in grief and horror turned his face away  and closed the  door. 
For  a  while  he stood in thought,  silent  upon the threshold, while those 
outside heard the greedy roaring of  the fire within. And then Denethor gave 
a great cry, and afterwards spoke no more, nor was ever again seen by mortal 
men. 
     'So passes Denethor, son of Ecthelion,' said Gandalf: Then he turned to 
Beregond and the Lord's servants that stood there aghast.  'And so pass also 
the days of Gondor that you have known; for good or evil they are ended. Ill 
deeds  have been done here; but let now  all enmity that lies between you be 
put away, for  it  was contrived by the Enemy and works  his  will. You have 
been  caught  in a net of warring duties that  you did not weave. But think, 
you servants of the Lord, blind in your obedience, that but  for the treason 
of Beregond Faramir, Captain of the White Tower, would now also be burned. 
     'Bear away  from this unhappy place your comrades who  have fallen. And 
we  will bear  Faramir, Steward of Gondor, to  a place where he can sleep in 
peace, or die if that be his doom.' 
     Then Gandalf and Beregond taking  up the bier bore  it away towards the 
Houses of  Hea ling,  while behind them walked Pippin with downcast head. 
But 
the servants of the Lord  stood gazing as stricken  men  at the house of the 
dead; and even  as Gandalf  came to the end of Rath Dnnen there was a  great 
noise. Looking back  they  saw the  dome of the house crack and smokes issue 
forth; and then with a rush and rumble of stone it fell in a flurry of fire; 
but still unabated the flames danced and  flickered among the ruins. Then in 
terror the servants fled and followed Gandalf.  

####-     At length they came back  to  the Steward's Door,  and  Beregond looked  
with grief  at  the porter. 'This deed I  shall  ever rue,'  he said; 'but a  
madness of haste was on  me, and he would not listen, but drew sword against  
me.' Then  taking  the key that he had  wr ested from the slain man he closed 
the door and locked it.  'This should now be given to the Lord  Faramir,' he 
said. 
     'The Prince  of Dol Amroth is in  command in the absence of  the Lord,' 
said Gandalf; 'but since he is not here,  I must take this on  myself. I bid 
you keep the key and guard it, until the City is set in order again.' 
     Now  at last they passed  into the high circles of the City, and in the 
light of morning  they went their way towards  the  Houses  of Healing;  and 
these were  fair houses set apart, for the care of those who were grievously 
sick, but now  they were prepared  for the tending of men  hurt in battle or  
dying. They stood not far from  the  Citadel-gate, in the sixth circle, nigh 
to  its southward  wall, and about  them was a  garden and a greensward with 
trees,  the only such place in the City. There dwelt the few women  that had 
been permitted to remain in Minas Tirith, since they were skilled in healing 
or in the service of the healers.  
     But even  as Gandalf and his companions came  carrying the bier  to the 
main door of the  Houses, they heard a great cry that went up from the field 
before the Gate and rising shrill and piercing into the sky passed, and died 
away on the wind. So terrible was the cry that for a moment all stood still, 
and  yet when it  had passed, suddenly their hearts were lifted up in such a  
hope as they had not known  since the darkness came  out of the East; and it  
seemed  to them that  the  light grew  clear and the sun  broke  through the 
clouds. 
     But Gandalf's  face was  grave and sad, and bidding Beregond and Pippin 
to take  Faramir into the Houses  of Healing, he  went  up on  to  the walls 
nearby; and there like a figure carven in white he stood  in the new sun and 
looked out. And he beheld with the sight that was given to him all that  had 
befallen; and when Jomer rode out from the forefront of his battle and stood 
beside those who lay upon the field, he sighed, and he cast  his cloak about 
him again,  and went  from  the  walls.  And Beregond  and  Pippin found him 
standing in thought before the door of the Houses when they came out. 
     They looked at him, and for  a  while he was  silent. At last he spoke. 
'My friends,' he  said, 'and all you people of this city and of the  Western 
lands! Things of great sorrow and renown have come to pass. Shall we weep or  

####-be glad? Beyond hope the Captain  of  our foes has been  destroyed,  and you 
have heard the echo of his last despair. But he has not gone without woe and 
bitter loss. And that I might have averted but for the madness of  Denethor. 
So long  has the reach of our Enemy become! Alas! but now I perceive how his 
will was able to enter into the very heart of the City. 
     'Though  the  Stewards  deemed  that  it  was  a secret  kept  only   by 
themselves, long ago I guessed that here in the White Tower, one at least of 
the Seven Seeing  Stones was preserved. In  the days of his  wisdom Denethor  
did not presume to  use it,  nor to  challenge Sauron, knowing the limits of 
his own strength. But his wisdom failed; and I fear that as the peril of his 
realm grew he looked in the Stone and was deceived: far too often, I  guess,  
since Boromir departed.  He was too great to  be subdued  to the will of the 
Dark Power, he saw nonetheless only those things which  that Power permitted 
him to see. The knowledge which he obtained was, doubtless, often of service 
to  him; yet the vision of the great might  of Mordor that was  shown to him 
fed the despair of his heart until it overthrew his mind.' 
     'Now I understand what seemed so strange to me!' said Pippin shuddering 
at his memories as he spoke. 'The Lord went away from the room where 
Faramir 
lay; and it was only when  he  returned that I first thought he was changed, 
old and broken.' 
     'It was  in the very hour  that  Faramir was brought to the Tower  that 
many of us saw  a strange light in the topmost chamber,' said Beregond. 'But 
we have  seen that light before, and it has  long been rumoured in the City, 
that the Lord would at times wrestle in thought with his Enemy.' 
     'Alas!  then I  have guessed rightly,' said Gandalf. 'Thus  the will of 
Sauron entered into Minas  Tirith; and thus  I  have  been delayed here. And 
here I shall still be forced to remain, for I shall soon have other charges,  
not Faramir only. 
     'Now I must go down to meet those  who come. I have seen  a  sight upon 
the field that is very grievous to my heart, and greater sorrow may yet come 
to  pass.  Come  with me, Pippin! But you,  Beregond,  should  return to the 
Citadel and tell the chief of the Guard there what has befallen. It  will be 
his duty, I fear, to withdraw you from the Guard; but  say to him that, if I 
may give him counsel, you should be sent to the Houses of Healing, to be the 
guard and servant of your captain, and to be at his side when he awakes  - if 
that shall ever be again. For by you  he  was saved from the fire. Go now! I 

####-shall return soon.' 
     With  that  he  turned away and went with Pippin down towards the lower 
city. And even as they  hastened on their way the wind brought  a grey rain,  
and all the fires sank, and there arose a great smoke before them. 
 

####- 

Chapter 8. The Houses of Healing 

 
 
     A mist was in Merry's eyes of tears  and weariness when they  drew near  
the  ruined  Gate of  Minas Tirith. He gave  little  heed to the  wreck  and 
slaughter that lay about all. Fire and smoke and  stench was in the air; for  
many engines  had been burned  or cast into  the fire-pits, and many  of the 
slain also, while here  and there lay  many  carcases of the great  Southron 
monsters, half-burned, or broken by stone-cast, or shot through  the eyes by 
the  valiant archers of Morthond. The flying rain had ceased for a time, and 
the sun  gleamed  up above;  but all the lower city  was still  wrapped in a  
smouldering reek. 
     Already men were labouring to clear a way through the jetsam of battle; 
and now out from the Gate came some bearing litters. Gently  they laid Jowyn 
upon soft pillows; but the king's body  they covered  with a great  cloth of 
gold,  and  they bore  torches about  him, and  their flames,  pale  in  the 
sunlight, were fluttered by the wind. 
     So Thjoden and Jowyn came  to  the City of Gondor, and all who saw them 
bared their heads and bowed; and they passed through the ash and fume of the 
burned circle, and went on and up  along the  streets of stone. To Merry the 
ascent seemed  agelong,  a  meaningless journey in a hateful dream, going on 
and on to some dim ending that memory cannot seize. 
     Slowly the  lights of  the torches in front of  him flickered  and went 
out,  and he was walking in  a darkness; and he  thought: 'This  is a tunnel 
leading to a tomb; there we shall stay forever.' But suddenly into his dream 
there fell a living voice. 
     'Well, Merry! Thank goodness I have found you!' 
     He looked up  and the mist before his eyes  cleared a little. There was 
Pippin! They were face  to face in a narrow lane,  and but for themselves it 
was empty. He rubbed his eyes.  
     'Where is the  king?' he said.  'And Jowyn?' Then he stumbled  and  sat 
down on a doorstep and began to weep again. 
     'They have gone up  into the Citadel,'  said  Pippin. 'I think you must  
have fallen  asleep on your  feet and taken the wrong turning. When we found 
that you were  not  with them,  Gandalf sent me to  look  for you.  Poor old 
Merry! How glad  I am to see you again!  But  you are worn out, and  I won't 

####-bother you with any talk. But tell me, are you hurt, or wounded?' 
     'No,' said Merry. 'Well, no, I don't think so. But I can't use my right 
arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed  him.  And my  sword burned all away like a 
piece of wood.' 
     Pippin's face was anxious. 'Well, you had better come with me  as quick  
as you can,' he said. 'I wish I could carry you. You aren't fit to walk  any 
further. They shouldn't have let you walk at all; but you must forgive them. 
So  many dreadful things have  happened  in the  City, Merry, that  one poor  
hobbit coming in from the battle is easily overlooked.' 
     'It's not  always  a misfortune being overlooked,' said Merry.  'I  was 
overlooked just now by  - no, no, I can't speak of it.  Help me, Pippin! It's 
all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.' 
     'Lean on me, Merry lad!' said Pippin. 'Come now! Foot by foot. It's not 
far.' 
     'Are you going to bury me?' said Merry. 
     'No, indeed!' said Pippin, trying  to sound cheerful, though  his heart 
was wrung with fear and pity. 'No, we are going to the Houses of Healing.' 
     They turned out of the lane that ran  between tall houses and the outer  
wall of the fourth circle, and they  regained the main street climbing up to 
the Citadel. Step by step they  went, while Merry swayed and murmured as one 
in sleep. 
     'I'll never  get him there,' thought  Pippin. 'Is there  no one to help 
me? I can't leave him here.' Just then to his surprise a boy came running up 
behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil Beregond's son. 
     'Hullo,  Bergil!' he  called.  'Where  are you going?  Glad to  see you  
again, and still alive!' 
     'I am running errands for the Healers,' said Bergil.  'I cannot stay.' 
     'Don't!'  said  Pippin.  'But  tell  them up  there that I have a  sick  
hobbit, a perian  mind you, come from the battle-field. I don't think he can 
walk so far. If Mithrandir is there, he will be glad of the message.' Bergil 
ran on. 
     'I'd better wait here,'  thought  Pippin. So he let Merry  sink  gently 
down on to the pavement in a patch of sunlight,  and then he sat down beside 
him, laying Merry's head  in his lap. He felt his body and limbs gently, and 
took his friend's hands in his own. The right hand felt icy to the touch. 
     It was  not long  before Gandalf himself  came  in  search  of them. He 
stooped over Merry and caressed  his brow; then he lifted him carefully. 'He 

####-should have  been  borne in  honour  into this  city,' he said.  'He has well 
repaid my trust; for  if Elrond had  not yielded to me, neither of you would 
have  set  out; and then far more grievous would the  evils of this day have 
been.' He sighed. 'And yet here is another charge on my hands, while all the 
time the battle hangs in the balance.' 
     So at last  Faramir and  Jowyn and Meriadoc  were laid  in  beds in the 
Houses of  Healing; and there they were tended well. For though all lore was 
in  these latter days fallen  from its  fullness  of old, the  leechcraft of 
Gondor was still wise, and skilled in the healing of wound and hurt, and all 
such  sickness as east of  the Sea mortal men  were subject to. Save old age 
only. For that  they had  found no  cure; and indeed the span of their lives 
had now waned to little more than that of  other men, and those  among  them 
who passed the tale of  five score years with vigour were grown few, save in  
some houses of purer blood.  But now their art and  knowledge were  baffled; 
for there  were  many sick of a  malady that  would not  be healed; and  they 
called it the Black Shadow, for it came from the Nazgyl.  And those who were 
stricken with it fell slowly into an ever deeper  dream, and  then passed to 
silence and a deadly cold, and so died. And it seemed to  the tenders  of the 
sick that on the Halfling and  on the Lady of Rohan this malady lay heavily.  
Still  at whiles as  the  morning wore away  they would speak,  murmuring in 
their  dreams; and  the  watchers  listened  to all that  they said,  hoping 
perhaps  to learn something that  would help them to understand their hurts.  
But  soon they  began to fall down into the darkness, and as the sun  turned 
west a  grey shadow crept over  their faces. But Faramir burned with a fever  
that would not abate. 
     Gandalf  went  from one to the other full of care, and he was told  all 
that the watchers could hear. And so  the day passed, while the great battle 
outside went on with shifting  hopes and strange  tidings; and still Gandalf 
waited and watched and did not  go forth; till at last the red sunset filled 
all the sky, and the light through the windows fell on the grey faces of the  
sick.  Then  it seemed to those  who  stood by that  in the glow  the  faces 
flushed softly as with health returning, but it was only a mockery of hope. 
     Then an old  wife, Ioreth, the eldest  of the women who  served in that 
house, looking on the fair  face  of Faramir, wept, for all the people loved 
him. And  she said: 'Alas! if he should die. Would that there  were kings in 
Gondor , as there were once  upon a time,  they  say! For  it is said in  old 
lore: The hands of the king  are  the hands of a healer. And so the rightful 

####-king could ever be known.' 
     And Gandalf,  who  stood by, said:  'Men  may long remember your words,  
Ioreth! For  there  is hope  in them. Maybe a king has  indeed  returned  to 
Gondor; or  have  you not  heard the strange tidings that  have come to  the 
City?' 
     'I  have been  too busy with this and that  to  heed all the crying and 
shouting,' she answered. 'All  I hope is that those murdering devils  do not 
come to this House and trouble the sick.' 
     Then Gandalf went  out in haste, and already  the fire  in  the sky was 
burning out, and the smouldering  hills were  fading, while ash-grey evening 
crept over the fields.  
     Now  as  the sun went down  Aragorn and Jomer and Imrahil drew near the 
City  with their captains and knights; and  when they came  before the  Gate 
Aragorn said: 
     'Behold the  Sun setting in  a  great fire! It is a sign of the end and 
fall of many things, and a change in the tides of  the world.  But this City 
and realm has rested in the charge of the  Stewards for many long years, and 
I  fear that if I enter it unbidden, then doubt and debate may  arise, which 
should not be while this war is  fought.  I will not enter in, nor  make any 
claim, until  it be seen whether we or Mordor shall prevail. Men shall pitch 
my tents upon  the field,  and here  I will await the welcome of the Lord of 
the City.' 
     But Jomer  said: 'Already you have raised the banner  of the Kings  and 
displayed  the  tokens  of  Elendil's  House.  Will you suffer  these to  be 
challenged?' 
     'No,' said Aragorn. 'But I deem the time unripe; and I have no mind for 
strife except with our Enemy and his servants. ' 
     And the Prince  Imrahil said. Your words, lord, are wise, if one who is 
a kinsman of  the  Lord Denethor  may counsel  you  in  this  matter. He  is 
strong-willed  and proud, but old; and  his mood has been strange  since his 
son was stricken down. Yet I would not have  you remain like a beggar at the 
door.' 
     'Not  a beggar,' said Aragorn. 'Say a captain  of the Rangers, who  are 
unused to  cities and  houses of  stone.' And he commanded  that  his banner  
should be furled;  and he did off the Star of the  North Kingdom and gave it 
to the keeping of the sons of Elrond. 
     Then the Prince Imrahil and Jomer of Rohan left him and passed  through 

####-the City and the tumult of the people,  and mounted to the Citadel; and they 
came to the Hall of the Tower, seeking the Steward. But they found his chair 
empty, and before the dais lay Thjoden King of the Mark upon a bed of state; 
and twelve torches stood about it, and twelve  guards, knights both of Rohan 
and Gondor. And the hangings  of  the bed were of  green and white, but upon 
the king  was laid the great cloth  of gold up  to his breast, and upon that 
his  unsheathed sword, and at his  feet his shield, The light of the torches 
shimmered in  his  white hair like  sun in the spray of a fountain,  but his 
face  was fair  and young, save that  a peace lay on it beyond the reach  of 
youth; and it seemed that he slept. 
     When they had stood silent  for a time  beside  the king, Imrahil said: 
'Where is the Steward? And where also is Mithrandir?' 
     And one of the guards answered: 'The Steward of Gondor is in the Houses 
of Healing.' 
     But  Jomer said: 'Where is the  Lady Jowyn,  my sister; for surely  she 
should be lying beside the  king, and  in no  less  honour? Where  have they 
bestowed her?' 
     And Imrahil said: 'But the Lady Jowyn was yet living when they bore her  
hither. Did you not know?' 
     Then hope unlooked-for came so  suddenly to Jomer's  heart, and with it 
the bite of care and fear renewed, that he said no more, but turned and went 
swiftly from the hall; and the Prince followed him. And when they came forth 
evening had fallen and many stars were in the sky. And there came Gandalf on 
foot and with him one cloaked in grey; and they met before the doors of  the 
Houses of Healing. And they greeted Gandalf and said: 'We  seek the Steward, 
and men say that  he is in  this House.  Has any hurt befallen him? And  the 
Lady Jowyn, where is she?' 
     And Gandalf answered: 'She lies  within and is not  dead, but  is  near 
death. But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart,  as you have heard, 
and he  is  now the Steward; for Denethor has departed, and his house is  in 
ashes.' And they were filled with grief and wonder at the tale that he told. 
     But Imrahil  said: 'So victory is shorn of gladness,  and  it is bitter  
bought, if both Gondor and Rohan are in one day bereft of their lords. Jomer  
rules the Rohirrim. Who shall rule the City meanwhile? Shall we not send now 
for the Lord Aragorn?' 
     And the cloaked man spoke and said:  'He is  come.' And they saw  as he 
stepped  into the  light of  the lantern  by the  door that  it was Aragorn, 

####-wrapped in the grey cloak  of  Lurien above his mail, and bearing  no  other 
token  than the green stone of Galadriel. 'I  have come because Gandalf begs 
me  to do so,'  he  said. 'But for the present I am but the  Captain  of the 
D®nedain of Arnor;  and the Lord  of  Dol Amroth  shall rule the City  until  
Faramir awakes. But it is my counsel that Gandalf should rule us  all in the 
days  that follow and in our  dealings with the Enemy.' And they agreed upon 
that. 
     Then Gandalf  said:  'Let us not  stay  at the door,  for the  time  is 
urgent. Let us enter! For  it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope 
remains for the sick that lie in the House. Thus spake Ioreth, wise-woman of  
Gondor: The hands of the  king are  the hands of a healer, and  so shall the 
rightful king be known .' 
     Then  Aragorn entered first and the  others followed. And there  at the 
door were two guards in the  livery of the  Cita del: one tall, but the other  
scarce the height of a boy; and when he saw them he cried  aloud in surprise 
and joy. 
     'Strider! How splendid! Do you know, I guessed  it was you in the black  
ships. But  they were all  shouting  corsairs and wouldn't listen to me. How 
did you do it?' 
     Aragorn laughed, and took the hobbit by the hand. 'Well met indeed!' he 
said. 'But there is not time yet for travellers' tales.' 
     But Imrahil said to Jomer: 'Is it  thus that we speak to our kings? Yet 
maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!' 
     And Aragorn hearing  him,  turned and  said: 'Verily, for  in the  high 
tongue of old I am Elessar, the Elfstone, and  Envinyatar, the Renewer': and  
he lifted from his breast the green stone that lay there. 'But Strider shall 
be the name of my house, if that be ever established.  In the high tongue it 
will not  sound  so ill,  and  Telcontar I will be and all  the heirs  of my 
body.' 
     And with that they passed into the House; and as  they went towards the 
rooms  where the  sick were tended  Gandalf told of the deeds  of  Jowyn and 
Meriadoc. 'For,' he said, 'long have I stood by them and at first they spoke 
much in their dreaming, before they sank into  the deadly darkness. Also  it 
is given to me to see many things  far off.' 
     Aragorn  went first to Faramir, and then to the Lady Jowyn, and last to 
Merry. When  he had looked on the faces of the sick  and seen their hurts he 
sighed. 'Here I must  put forth all such power and skill as is given to me,' 

####-he said.  'Would that Elrond were here, for he is the eldest of all our race, 
and has the greater power.' 
     And Jomer seeing  that he was sorrowful and weary said: 'First you must  
rest, surely, and at the least eat a little?' 
     But Aragorn answered: 'Nay, for these  three, and most soon for Faramir,  
time is running out. All speed is needed.' 
     Then he called to Ioreth and he said: 'You have store  in this House of 
the herbs of healing?' 
     'Yes, lord,' she answered; 'but not enough, I reckon, for all that will 
need  them. But I am sure I  do  not know  where we shall find more; for all 
things are amiss in these dreadful days, what with  fires and  burnings, and 
the lads that run errands so few, and all the roads blocked. Why, it is days 
out of count since ever a carrier came in from Lossarnach to the market! But 
we do our best in this  House with what we have, as  I am sure your lordship 
will know.' 
     'I will judge that when I see,' said Aragorn.  'One thing also is short 
time for speech. Have you athelas?' 
     'I do not know,  I am  sure, lord,' she answered, 'at least not by that 
name. I will go and ask of the herb-master; he knows all the old names.' 
     'It is also called kingsfoil,' said Aragorn; 'and maybe you  know it by 
that name, for so the country-folk call it in these latter days.' 'Oh that!' 
said Ioreth. 'Well, if your lordship had named it at first I could have told 
you. No, we have none of it, I am sure. Why, I have  never heard that it had 
any great virtue;  and indeed I  have often said to  my sisters when we came 
upon it growing in the woods: "kingsfoil" I said, " 'tis a strange name, and 
I  wonder why 'tis called so; for if I were a king, I would have plants more 
bright in  my garden". Still it smells sweet  when bruised,  does it not? If 
sweet is the right word: wholesome, maybe, is nearer.' 
     'Wholesome verily,' said Aragorn. 'And now,  dame, if you love the Lord 
Faramir, run  as quick as your  tongue and get me kingsfoil, if  there  is a  
leaf in the City.' 
     'And if  not,' said Gandalf,  'I  will  ride  to Lossarnach with  Ioreth 
behind me, and she  shall take me to the woods, but not  to her sisters. And 
Shadowfax shall show her the meaning of haste.' 
     When Ioreth was  gone, Aragorn bade the other  women to make water hot. 
Then he took  Faramir's hand in  his, and laid the other hand  upon the sick  
man's brow. It was drenched with sweat; but Faramir did not move or make any 

####-sign, and seemed hardly to breathe. 
     'He is nearly spent,' said Aragorn turning to Gandalf. 'But  this comes 
not from  the wound. See! that  is healing. Had he been smitten by some dart  
of the Nazgyl,  as you thought, he would have died that night. This hurt was 
given  by  some  Southron arrow,  I  would guess.  Who drew it forth? Was it 
kept?' 
     'I drew it forth,'  said  Imrahil, 'and staunched the wound. But I  did 
not keep the arrow, for we had much to  do. It was, as I remember, just such 
a  dart as the Southrons use. Yet I  believed  that it came from the Shadows 
above, for else his fever and sickness were not  to be understood; since the 
wound was not deep or vital. How then do you read the matter?' 
     'Weariness,  grief for his father's  mood,  a  wound,  and over all the 
Black Breath,' said  Aragorn.  'He is a man of  staunch will, for already he 
had  come close  under  the Shadow  before  ever  he  rode to battle on  the 
out-walls.  Slowly the dark must have crept  on  him,  even as he fought and 
strove to hold his outpost. Would that I could have been here sooner!' 
     Thereupon the herb-master enter ed.  'Your lordship asked for kingsfoil, 
as the rustics name it, he said; or athelas in the noble tongue, or to those 
who know somewhat of the Valinorean. . .' 
     'I  do  so,'  said Aragorn, 'and I care  not  whether you say  now asla  
aranion or kingsfoil, so long as you have some.' 
     'Your  pardon lord!' said the  man. 'I see  you  are a lore-master, not 
merely  a captain of  war. But alas! sir, we do not keep  this  thing in the 
Houses of Healing, where  only the  gravely hurt or sick  are tended. For it 
has no virtue that we know of, save perhaps  to sweeten a fouled air, or  to 
drive away  some passing  heaviness.  Unless,  of  course, you  give heed to 
rhymes of old days which women such as our good Ioreth still repeat  without 
understanding. 
     When the black breath blows  
     and death's shadow grows  
     and all lights pass, 
     come athelas! come athelas! 
     Life to the dying 
     In the king's hand lying! 
     It is but  a doggrel, I fear, garbled  in the  memory of old wives. Its 
meaning I leave to your judgement, if indeed it has any. But  old folk still 
use an infusion of the herb for headaches.' 

####-     'Then in the name of the  king, go  and find some old man  of less lore 
and more wisdom who keeps some in his house!' cried Gandalf.  
     Now  Aragorn knelt beside Faramir,  and held a hand  upon his brow. And 
those that watched felt that some great struggle was going on. For Aragorn's 
face  grew grey  with weariness; and ever and anon  he  called the  name  of 
Faramir, but each time more fa intly to their hearing, as  if Aragorn himself 
was removed from them, and walked afar  in some dark vale,  calling  for one 
that was lost. 
     And at last Bergil came running in, and he bore six  leaves in a cloth. 
'It is kingsfoil,  Sir,' he  said; 'but not fresh, I fear. It must have been 
culled two weeks ago at the least. I hope it will  serve, Sir?' Then looking 
at Faramir he burst into tears. 
     But Aragorn smiled. 'It  will serve,' he said. 'The worst is  now over. 
Stay and be comforted!'  Then taking two leaves,  he  laid them on his hands 
and breathed on them,  and then  he crushed them, and straightway  a  living 
freshness filled the room, as if the air itself awoke and tingled, sparkling 
with joy. And then he cast the leaves into the bowls  of steaming water that 
were brought  to  him,  and  at  once all hearts  were  lightened.  For  the 
fragrance that came to each was like a memory of dewy mornings of 
unshadowed 
sun in some land of which the fair world in Spring is itself but  a fleeting 
memory.  But  Aragorn  stood  up as one refreshed, and his eyes smiled as he 
held a bowl before Faramir's dreaming face. 
     'Well now!  Who would have believed  it?'  said Ioreth to  a woman that 
stood beside her. 'The weed is  better than I thought. It reminds me  of the 
roses of Imloth Melui when I was a lass, and no king could ask for better.' 
     Suddenly Faramir  stirred, and he  opened  his eyes,  and he looked  on 
Aragorn who  bent over him; and a light of knowledge and love was kindled in 
his  eyes, and he spoke softly.  'My  lord, you called  me. I come. What does 
the king command?' 
     'Walk no more in the shadows, but awake!' said Aragorn. 'You are weary. 
Rest a while, and take food, and be ready when I return.' 
     'I will, lord,' said Faramir. 'For who would lie idle when the king has 
returned?' 
     'Farewell then  for a while!' said Aragorn.  'I must go  to  others who 
need me.' And he left the chamber with Gandalf and Imrahil; but Beregond and 
his son remained behind, unable to contain their joy. As he followed Gandalf 

####-and shut the door Pippin heard Ioreth exclaim: 
     'King! Did you hear  that? What  did I say? The  hands  of  a healer, I 
said.'  And  soon the word had  gone  out  from the House  that the king was 
indeed  come among  them, and after war he brought healing; and the news ran 
through the City. 
     But Aragorn came to Jowyn, and he said: 'Here there is a  grievous hurt 
and a  heavy blow. The arm that  was broken  has been tended with due skill, 
and it will  mend in time, if she  ha s  the  strength  to live:  It  is  the 
shield-arm  that is maimed; but the chief evil comes through the  sword-arm.  
In that there now seems no life, although it is unbroken. 
     'Alas! For she was pitted against a foe beyond the strength of her mind 
or body. And those who  will take a weapon to such an enemy must  be sterner 
than  steel,  if the very shock shall  not destroy them. It was an evil doom 
that set her in his path. For she is a fair maiden, fairest  lady of a house 
of queens. And yet I know not how I should speak of her. When I first looked 
on her  and  perceived  her unhappiness, it seemed to me that I saw a  white 
flower standing straight and proud, shapely as a lily, and yet knew  that it 
was  hard, as if  wrought by elf-wrights out of steel. Or  was  it, maybe, a  
frost that had turned  its sap to ice, and  so it stood, bitter-sweet, still 
fair to see, but stricken, soon  to fall and die? Her malady begins far back  
before this day, does it not, Jomer?' 
     'I marvel that you should  ask me,  lord,' he answered. 'For I hold you  
blameless  in  this  matter, as in  all else; yet  I knew not that Jowyn, my 
sister, was touched by any  frost, until  she first looked on you.  Care and 
dread she had,  and shared with me, in the days of Wormtongue and the king's 
bewitchment; and she tended the king in growing fear. But that did not bring  
her to this pass!' 
     'My friend,' said Gandalf,  'you had horses, and deeds of arms, and the 
free fields; but she, born  in the body of a maid, had  a spirit and courage 
at least the match of yours.  Yet  she  was doomed to wait  upon an old man, 
whom she  loved as a father, and watch him falling  into a  mean dishonoured 
dotage; and her part seemed to her more ignoble  than that  of the  staff he 
leaned on. 
     'Think you that Wormtongue  had poison only for Thjoden's ears? Dotard! 
What is the  house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands  drink  in the 
reek, and their brats roll on the floor among their dogs? Have you not heard 

####-those words before? Saruman spoke them, the teacher of Wormtongue. Though  
I 
do  not doubt that Wormtongue at home  wrapped their  meaning in terms  
more 
cunning. My lord,  if your sister's love for you, and her will still bent to 
her duty, had not restrained her lips; you might have heard even such things 
as these  escape them. But who knows what she spoke to  the darkness, alone, 
in the bitter watches of the night, when all her  life seemed shrinking, and 
the walls of her bower closing in  about her,  a hutch  to trammel some wild  
thing in? ' 
     Then Jomer was  silent, and looked on  his sister, as if pondering anew 
all the days of their past life together. But Aragorn said: 'I saw also what 
you saw,  Jomer. Few other  griefs amid the  ill  chances of this world have 
more  bitterness and shame for a man's heart than  to  behold the  love of a  
lady so fair and brave that cannot be returned Sorrow and pity have followed 
me ever since I left her desperate in Dunharrow and rode to the Paths of the 
Dead;  and no  fear upon  that way was so present as the fear for what might  
befall her. And yet, Jomer, I  say to you that she loves you more truly than 
me; for you she loves and knows; but  in me  she loves  only a shadow and  a 
thought: a hope of glory and  great deeds, and lands far from  the fields of 
Rohan. 
     'I have, maybe, the power to heal her body, and to recall  her from the 
dark valley. But to what she will awake: hope, or forgetfulness, or despair, 
I do  not know. And if to despair, then  she will die, unless  other healing 
comes  which  I cannot bring. Alas!  for  her  deeds have  set her among  the 
queens of great renown.' 
     Then Aragorn stooped and looked in her face, and it was indeed white as 
a lily, cold as frost, and hard as graven stone.  But he bent and kissed her  
on the brow, and called her softly, saying: 
     'Jowyn Jomund's daughter, awake! For your enemy has passed away!' 
     She did not stir,  but now she began again  to  breathe deeply, so that 
her breast rose  and  fell  beneath the white linen of  the sheet. Once more 
Aragorn bruised two leaves of athelas and cast them into steaming water; and 
he laved her brow with it, and her right arm lying cold and nerveless on the 
coverlet. 
     Then,  whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten  power of Westernesse, 
or whether it was but his words  of the Lady Jowyn that  wrought on them, as 

####-the sweet influence of the herb  stole about the chamber it seemed to  those 
who stood by that a keen wind blew through the window, and it bore no scent, 
but was an air wholly fresh  and  clean  and young, as if it had not  before 
been  breathed  by any  living thing and came  new-made from snowy 
mountains 
high beneath a  dome of stars,  or from shores of silver far away  washed by 
seas of foam. 
     'Awake, Jowyn, Lady of  Rohan!'  said  Aragor n again,  and he  took her 
right hand in his and  felt it  warm with life returning. 'Awake! The shadow 
is gone and all darkness is washed  clean!' Then he laid her hand in Jomer's 
and  stepped  away. 'Call  her!' he said, and  he passed  silently  from the 
chamber. 
     'Jowyn, Jowyn!' cried Jomer amid his tears. But she opened her eyes and  
said: 'Jomer! What  joy is this? For they said that you were slain. Nay, but 
that was only the dark voices in my dream. How long have I been dreaming?' 
     'Not long, my sister,' said Jomer. 'But think no more on it!' 
     ' I am  strangely weary,' she said. 'I must rest a little. But tell me, 
what of the Lord of the Mark? Alas! Do not tell me that that was a dream for  
I know that it was not. He is dead as he foresaw.' 
     'He is dead,' said Jomer, 'but he bade me say farewell to  Jowyn dearer  
than daughter. He lies now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor.' 
     'That is grievous,' she said. 'And yet  it  is  good beyond all  that I 
dared hope in the dark  days, when it seemed that the House of Eorl was sunk 
in honour less than  any shepherd's cot. And what of the king's esquire, the 
Halfling? Jomer, you shall make him a knight  of  the Riddermark, for he  is 
valiant!' 
     'He lies nearby  in this  House,  and I will go  to him,' said Gandalf.  
'Jomer  shall stay here for a while. But do  not  speak  yet of  war or woe, 
until you are made whole  again. Great gladness  it is to see you wake again  
to health and hope, so valiant a lady!' 
     'To health?' said  Jowyn. 'It  may  be so. At  least  while there is an 
empty saddle of some  fallen Rider that I can  fill, and there  are deeds to 
do. But to hope? I do not know.' 
     Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry's room, and there  they found  Aragorn 
standing by  the  bed.   'Poor  old Merry!' cried Pippin, and  he ran to  the 
bedside, for it seemed to  him that  his friend looked worse, and a greyness 
was in his face, as if a weight of years of sorrow  lay on him; and suddenly 

####-a fear seized Pippin that Merry would die. 
     'Do not be afraid,'  said Aragorn. 'I came in  time, and  I have called 
him back. He  is weary now, and grieved, and  he has taken a hurt  like  the 
Lady Jowyn, daring  to  smite  that deadly  thing. But  these  evils can  be 
amended, so strong and gay a sp irit is in him. His grief he will not forget; 
but it will not darken his heart, it will teach him wisdom.' 
     Then Aragorn laid his hand on Merry's head, and passing his hand gently  
through the brown curls, he touched the eyelids, and called him by name. And 
when  the fragrance  of athelas stole through the room, like  the  scent  of 
orchards, and of heather in the sunshine full of bees, suddenly Merry awoke,  
and he said: 
     'I am hungry. What is the time?' 
     'Past supper -time  now,' said Pippin; 'though I daresay  I could  bring 
you something, if they will let me.' 
     'They will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'And anything else that this Rider of 
Rohan  may desire, if it can be found in Minas Tirith, where  his name is in 
honour.' 
     'Good!' said Merry.  'Then I  would  like supper first, and after that a  
pipe.' At that his face clouded. 'No, not a pipe.  I don't think I'll  smoke 
again.' 
     'Why not?' said Pippin. 
     'Well,' answered Merry slowly. 'He is dead. It  has brought it all back  
to me.  He said he was sorry he  had never had a chance of talking herb-lore 
with me. Almost the last thing he ever said. I shan't ever be able to  smoke 
again without  thinking of  him, and  that day, Pippin, when he  rode up  to 
Isengard and was so polite.' 
     'Smoke then, and  think of  him!' said  Aragorn.  'For he  was a gentle 
heart and a great king and kept his oaths; and he rose out of the shadows to 
a last fair  morning.  Though your  service to him was brief, it should be a  
memory glad and honourable to the end of your days.' 
     Merry  smiled. 'Well then,' he said, 'if  Strider will  provide what is 
needed, I will smoke and think. I had some of Saruman's best in my pack, but 
what became of it in the battle, I am sure I don't know.' 
     'Master  Meriadoc,'  said  Aragorn,  'if  you  think that  I have passed 
through the  mountains and the realm of Gondor with  fire and sword to bring 
herbs to a  careless soldier who throws away his gear,  you are mistaken. If 
your pack has not been found, then you must send for the herb-master of this 

####-House. And he will tell you that he  did  not know that the herb  you desire 
had  any  virtues, but  that it is  called westmansweed by  the vulgar,  and 
galenas by the  noble,  and  other names  in other tongues more learned, and 
after adding  a few half-forgotten  rhymes that he  does not understand,  he 
will regretfully inform  you  that there is none in the  House, and  he will 
leave you  to reflect  on  the history of tongues.  And so now must I. For I 
have not slept in such a bed as this, since I rode from Dunharrow, nor eaten 
since the dark before dawn.' 
     Merry seized his hand and kissed it. 'I am frightfully sorry,' he said. 
'Go at once!  Ever since that night at Bree we have been  a nuisance to you. 
But it is the way of my people to use light words at such times and say less 
than they mean. We fear to say too much. It robs us of the  right words when  
a jest is out of place.' 
     'I  know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way ' said 
Aragorn. 'May the Shire live for ever unwithered!' And kissing Merry he went 
out, and Gandalf went with him.  
     Pippin  remained behind. 'Was  there  ever any one like him?'  he said. 
'Except Gandalf, of course. I think they  must be related. My dear ass, your 
pack is lying by your bed, and you  had  it on your back when I  met you. He 
saw it all the time, of course. And anyway I have some stuff of my own. Come 
on now! Longbottom Leaf it is.  Fill up while I run and see about some food. 
And  then let's be  easy for  a bit. Dear me!  We Tooks  and Brandybucks, we 
can't live long on the heights.' 
     'No,' said Merry. 'I can't. Not yet, at any rate. But at least, Pippin, 
we can now see them, and honour them. It is best to  love first what you are 
fitted to love, I suppose: you must start somewhere and have some roots, and 
the soil of the Shire is deep. Still there are things deeper and higher; and 
not a gaffer could tend his garden  in  what he calls  peace  but  for them, 
whether  he knows about them or not.  I am  glad that   I know about them,  a  
little. But I don't know why I am talking like this. Where is that leaf? And 
get my pipe out of my pack, if it isn't broken.' 
     Aragorn and  Gandalf went now to the  Warden of the  Houses of Healing, 
and they counselled him that Faramir and Jowyn should remain there and still 
be tended with care for many days. 
     'The Lady Jowyn,' said Aragorn, 'will wish soon to rise and depart; but 
she should not be  permitted to do so,  if you  can in any way restrain her, 
until at least ten days be passed.' 

####-     'As for Faramir,' said Gandalf, 'he must soon  learn that his father is 
dead. But the full  tale of the  madness  of Denethor should  not be told to 
him, until  he is quite  healed and has duties to do. See  that Beregond and 
the perian who were present do not speak to him of these things yet!' 
     And the other perian Meriadoc who is  under my care, what of him?' said 
the Warden. 
     'It  is likely that  he will  be  fit  to arise tomorrow, for  a  short 
while,' said Aragorn.  'Let him do so, if he  wishes. He may walk a little in 
the care of his friends.' 
     'They are a remarkable race,' said the Warden, nodding his head.  'Very 
tough in the fibre, I deem.' 
     At the  doors of the Houses many were already gathered to  see Aragorn,  
and they  followed  after him; and when at last he  had supped, men came and 
prayed that he would heal their kinsmen or their friends whose lives were in 
peril through hurt or wound, or who lay under the Black  Shadow. And 
Aragorn 
arose and went out, and he sent for  the sons of  Elrond,  and together they 
laboured  far into the  night. And word went through the City: 'The  King is 
come again indeed.' And they named  him Elfstone, because of the green stone 
that  he wore, and so  the name  which it was for etold at his  birth that he 
should bear was chosen for him by his own people. 
     And when he  could labour no  more,  he cast his  cloak  about him, and 
slipped out of the City, and went to his tent just ere dawn and  slept for a  
little. And in the morning the banner of  Dol Amroth, a  white ship  like  a  
swan upon blue water, floated from the Tower, and men looked up and 
wondered 
if the coming of the King had been but a dream. 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. The Last Debate 

 
 
     The morning came after  the  day of battle, and it was fair with  light 
clouds and the wind turning  westward. Legolas and  Gimli were early abroad, 
and  they  begged leave to go up  into the City; for  they were eager to see 
Merry and Pippin. 
     'It is good to learn that they are still alive,' said Gimli;  'for they 
cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have such pains 
all wasted.' 
     Together the  Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk that saw 
them  pass  marvelled to see such companions; for Legolas was fair  of  face 
beyond the measure of Men, and  he sang an elven-song in a clear voice as he 
walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked  beside him, stroking his beard and 
staring about him. 
     'There is  some  good  stone-work here,'  he said as he  looked  a t the 
walls;  'but also  some that is  less good, and  the streets could be better  
contrived. When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer him the service of 
stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a town to be proud of.' 
     'They need more gardens,' said Legolas. 'The houses are dead, and there 
is too little  here that grows and is glad.  If Aragorn comes into his  own, 
the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing and trees that do not 
die.' 
     At  length they came to the Prince  Imrahil, and  Legolas  looked at him 
and bowed  low; for he  saw that here  indeed was one who had elven-blood in 
his veins. 'Hail, lord!' he said.  'It is long since the people  of Nimrodel 
left the woodlands of Lurien, and yet still one may see that  no t all sailed 
from Amroth's haven west over water.' 
     'So it is said in the lore of my land,' said the Prince; 'yet never has 
one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And I marvel to 
see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war. What do you seek?' 
     'I  am  one of the Nine  Companions  who  set  out with Mithrandir from 
Imladris, said Legolas and with  this Dwarf, my friend, I came with the Lord 
Aragorn. But now we wish to see  our friends. Meriadoc and Peregrin, who are 
in your keeping, we are told.' 
     'You  will  find them  in  the Houses of Healing, and  I will  lead you  

####-thither,' said Imrahil. 
     'It will be  enough if you send one to guide  us,  lord,' said Legolas.  
'For Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish  to  enter the City 
again at this  time. Yet there is need  for the captains to hold  council at 
once, and he prays that you and Jomer of  Rohan will come down to his tents,  
as soon as may be. Mithrandir is already there.' 
     'We will come,' said Imrahil; and they parted with courteous words. 
     'That  is  a  fair lord and a great captain of men,'  said Legolas. 'If 
Gondor has such men still in these  days of fading, great must have been its 
glory in the days of its rising.' 
     'And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and  was wrought in the 
first building,' said  Gimli. 'It is ever so with the things that Men begin: 
there  is a frost  in Spring, or a blight in Summer, and they  fail of their 
promise.' 
     'Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,' said  Legolas. 'And that  will 
lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places unlooked-for. 
The deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.' 
     'And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess,' said 
the Dwarf. 
     'To that the Elves know not the answer,' said Legolas.  
     With that the servant of the  Prince came and led them to the Houses of 
Healing; and there they found their friends in the garden, and their meeting 
was a merry one.  For a while  they walked and talked, rejoicing for a brief 
space in peace  and rest under  the morning high up in the windy  circles of 
the City. Then when Merry became weary, they went and sat upon the wall 
with 
the  greensward of  the  Houses of Healing behind them; and  away  southward 
before  them was the Anduin glittering in the sun, as it flowed away, out of 
the  sight even  of Legolas, into the wide  flats and green haze of Lebennin 
and South Ithilien. 
     And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked out 
against the sun,  and as  he  gazed he  saw white sea -birds  beating  up the 
River. 
     'Look!' he cried. 'Gulls! They are flying far inland. A wonder they are 
to me and a trouble to my heart. Never in  all my life had I met them, until 
we came to  Pelargir, and  there I heard them crying in the air as we rode to 
the battle of the ships. Then I stood still, forgetting war in Middle-earth; 

####-for their wailing  voices spoke to me of the Sea. The Sea!  Alas! I have not 
yet  beheld  it.  But  deep  in  the  hearts  of  a ll  my  kindred lies  the 
sea -longing,  which it is perilous  to stir. Alas! for the  gulls. No  peace 
shall I have again under beech or under elm.' 
     'Say not so!' said Gimli. 'There are  countless things still to see  in 
Middle-earth, and great works  to  do. But if  all  the fair folk take to the 
Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to stay.' 
     'Dull and dreary indeed!' said Merry: 'You must  not go to the  Havens, 
Legolas. There will always  be some folk, big or little, and even a few wise 
dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I  hope so. Though I feel somehow 
that the worst of this war is still to come. How I wish it was all over, and 
well over!' 
     'Don't  be  so gloomy!' cried Pippin.  'The Sun is shining, and here we 
are  together  for a day or two at least. I want to hear more about you all. 
Come, Gimli!  You  and  Legolas have mentioned  your  strange  journey  with 
Strider about a dozen times  already  this  morning. But you haven't told me 
anything about it.' 
     'The Sun may  shine here,' said Gimli, 'but  there are memories of that 
road  that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness. Had I known what was 
before me, I think  that not for any friendship would I have taken the Paths 
of the Dead.' 
     'The Paths of the Dead?' said Pippin.  'I heard Aragorn say  that and I 
wondered what he could mean. Won't you tell us some more?' 
     'Not willingly,' said Gimli.  'For upon that road  I  was put to shame: 
Gimli Gluin's son, who had deemed  himself  more tough than Men, and 
hardier 
under  earth than  any Elf. But neither did  I prove;  and I was held to the 
road only by the will of Aragorn.' 
     'And by the love of him also,' said Legolas. 'For all those who come to 
know him come to love him after his own fashion,  even the cold maiden of the 
Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere you came there, Merry, that we 
left Dunharrow, and such a fear was  on all the folk that none would look on 
our going,  save the Lady Jowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There 
was grief at that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.' 
     'Alas! I had heart only for myself,' said Gimli. 'Nay! I will not speak 
of that journey.' 
     He fell silent;  but Pippin and  Merry were  so eager for news that  at 

####-last  Legolas  said:  'I will tell you enough for your peace;  for I felt not 
the  horror, and I feared not the shadows of  Men, powerless and frail  as I 
deemed them.' 
     Swiftly then he told of  the haunted  road under the mountains, and the 
dark tryst at Erech, and the gr eat ride thence, ninety leagues and three, to 
Pelargir on Anduin. 'Four days and nights, and on into a fifth, we rode from 
the Black Stone,' he said.  'And lo! in the darkness of Mordor my hope rose;  
for in that  gloom the Shadow Host seemed to grow stronger and more terrible 
to look upon. Some I saw riding, some striding, yet all moving with the same 
great speed. Silent they were, but there was a gleam in  their eyes. In  the 
uplands of Lamedon they overtook our horses, and  swept round us, and  would 
have passed us by, if Aragorn had not forbidden them. 
     'At his command they fell back. "Even the shades of Men are obedient to 
his will," I thought. "They may serve his needs yet! " 
     'One day of light  we  rode, and then  came the  day  without dawn, a nd 
still we rode on, and  Ciril and Ringlu we crossed; and on  the third day we 
came to  Linhir above  the mouth  of  Gilrain.  And  there  men  of  Lamedon 
contested the fords with fell folk  of Umbar and Harad who had sailed up the 
river. But  defenders   and  foes alike gave up  the battle and fled  when we 
came,  crying out that the King of the Dead was upon them. Only Angbor, Lord 
of Lamedon, had the heart to abide us; and Aragorn bade  him gather his folk 
and come behind, if they dared, when the Grey Host had passed. 
     ' "At Pelargir the Heir of Isildur will have need of you," he said. 
     'Thus we crossed  over Gilrain,  driving the allies  of  Mordor in rout 
before us; and then we rested a while. But soon Aragorn  arose, saying: "Lo!  
already  Mina s Tirith is assailed. I  fear that it  will fall ere we come to 
its aid." So  we mounted again before  night had passed and went on with all  
the speed that our horses could endure over the plains of Lebennin.' 
     Legolas paused  and  sighed,  and turning his eyes southward softly  he 
sang: 
     Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui 
     In the green fields of Lebennin! 
     Tall grows the grass there. In the wind from the Sea 
     The white lilies sway, 
     And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alfirin  
     In the green fields of Lebennin, 
     In the wind from the Sea! 

####-     'Green are those  fields in the songs of my people; but  they were dark 
then,  grey  wastes  in  the blackness  before  us. And over  the wide land, 
trampling unheeded the grass and  the flowers, we hunted our foes through  a 
day and a night, until we came at the bitter end to the Great River at last. 
     'Then I thought in my heart that we drew near to the  Sea; for wide was 
the  water in the darkness, and sea -birds innumerable cried on its,  shores.  
Alas  for  the wailing of the  gulls! Did  not the Lady tell me to beware of 
them? And now I cannot forget them.' 
     'For my part  I heeded them not,' said Gimli; 'for we came then at last  
upon battle in earnest. There at Pelargir lay the main fleet of Umbar, fifty 
great ships and smaller  vessels beyond count. Many of those that we pursued 
had reached the havens before us, and brought their fear with them; and some 
of  the ships had put off, seeking to escape down the River  or to reach  the 
far shore; and many of  the  smaller  craft were  ablaze.  But the Haradrim, 
being  now  driven  to the brink, turned at  bay,  and they were  fierce  in 
despair; and they laughed when they looked on us, for they were a great army 
still. 
     'But Aragorn  halted and cried with a great voice:  "Now  come!  By the 
Black Stone I call you! " And suddenly the Shadow Host that had hung back at 
the last  came up like a grey tide, sweeping all away before it. Faint cries 
I heard, and  dim horns b lowing, and a murmur as of countless far voices: it  
was like the echo of  some forgotten battle in the Dark Years long ago. Pale  
swords were drawn; but I know not whether their blades would still bite, for  
the Dead needed no longer any weapon but fear. None would withstand them. 
     'To every  ship they came that was drawn up, and then  they passed over  
the water to those that were anchored; and all the mariners were filled with 
a madness  of  terror and leaped  overboard, save the  slaves chained to the 
oars. Reckless  we rode among  our fleeing foes,  driving them  like leaves,  
until  we  came to  the  shore. And then to each  of  the  great  ships that 
remained Aragorn sent one of the D®nedain,  and  they comforted the captives 
that were aboard, and bade  them put aside fear and be free. 
     'Ere  that dark day ended none of the  enemy were left to resist us all 
were drowned, or were flying  south in the hope to find their own lands upon 
foot.  Strange and wonderful I thought it that  the designs of Mordor should 
be overthrown by such wraiths of fear and darkness. With its own weapons was 
it worsted!' 
     'Strange indeed,' said Legolas. 'In that  hour I  looked on Aragorn and 

####-thought how  great and terrible a Lord he might have become in the  strength 
of his  will, had he taken the Ring to  himself.  Not for naught does Mordor  
fear him. But nobler is his spirit than  the understanding of Sauron; for is 
he not of  the children of  L®thien? Never shall that  line fail, though the 
years may lengthen beyond count.' 
     'Beyond  the eyes of the Dwarves are  such  foretellings,'  said Gimli. 
'But mighty indeed was  Aragorn that day. Lo! all the black fleet was in his 
hands; and he chose the greatest ship to be his own, and he went up into it. 
Then he  let sound a great concourse  of trumpets taken  from the enemy; and 
the Shadow Host withdrew to the shore. There they stood silent, hardly to be  
seen, save for a red gleam in their eyes that caught the glare of the  ships 
that were  burning.  And Aragorn  spoke  in a  loud voice  to  the Dead Men, 
crying: 
     ' "Hear  now the words of the Heir of Isildur!  Your oath is fulfilled. 
Go back and trouble not the valleys ever again! Depart and be at rest! " 
     'And thereupon the King of the Dead stood out before the host and broke 
his spear and cast it down. Then he bowed low and  turned away; and  swiftly 
the whole grey host drew off and vanished like a mist that is driven back by  
a sudden wind; and it seemed to me that I awoke from a dream. 
     'That  night  we  rested  while  others  laboured.  For there were many 
captives set  free,  and many slaves released who  had  been folk  of Gondor  
taken in raids; and  soon also  there  was  a great gathering  of men out of 
Lebennin and the  Ethir, and Angbor of Lamedon came u p with all the 
horsemen 
that he could muster. Now that the fear of the Dead was removed they came to 
aid us and to look on  the Heir of Isildur; for the  rumour of that name had 
run like fire in the dark. 
     'And  that  is near the end  of our tale.  For  during  that evening and 
night many ships were  made ready and  manned; and in the morning the  fleet 
set forth. Long  past it now seems,  yet it was but the morn of  the day ere 
yesterday, the  sixth  since  we rode  from Dunharrow. But still Aragorn was 
driven by fear that time was too short. 
     '  "It is forty leagues and  two from Pelargir to  the  landings at the 
Harlond,"  he  said.  "Yet to  the  Harlond we must  come tomorrow  or  fail  
utterly." 
     'The oars were now wielded by free men, and manfully they laboured; yet 
slowly we passed up  the Great River, for  we strove against its stream, and 

####-though that is not swift down in  the South,  we had no help  of wind. Heavy 
would my heart have been, for all our victory at the  havens, if Legolas had 
not laughed suddenly. 
     ' "Up  with your beard, Durin's son! " he said. "For thus is it spoken: 
Oft hope is  born, when  all is forlorn." But what hope  he saw from afar he 
would  not tell. When  night came it  did  but deepen  the darkness, and our 
hearts were  hot, for away in  the North we saw a red glow under the  cloud,  
and Aragorn said: "Minas Tirith is burning." 
     'But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea -crafty men of the Ethir  
gazing southward spoke  of a change coming  with a fresh  wind from the Sea. 
Long  ere day the masted ships  hoisted sail; and our speed grew, until dawn 
whitened the foam at our prows. And so it was, as  you know, that we came in 
the third  hour of the morning with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled, and we 
unfurled the great standard in battle. It was a great  day and a great hour, 
whatever may come after.' 
     'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,' said Legolas.  
'Great  deed was the riding of  the Paths  of the Dead, and great  it  shall 
remain, though none be left  in Gondor to sing of it in the days that are to 
come.' 
     'And  that may well befall,' said Gimli.  'For the faces of Aragorn and 
Gandalf are grave. Much I  wonder what counsels they are taking in the tents 
there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with our victory  the  war 
was now over.  Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for  
the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.' 
     'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,' said Legolas, 'and for the love 
of the Lord of the White Tree.' 
     Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the high 
place, each busy with his own thoughts, while the Captains debated. 
     When the Prince Imrahil had parted  from Legolas and Gimli, at once  he 
sent  for Jomer; and he went down with him  from the  City, and they came to 
the tents  of Aragorn that were set up on the field not  far  from the place 
where King Thjoden had  fallen.  And there they took  counsel together  with 
Gandalf and Aragorn and the sons of Elrond. 
     'My lords,' said Gandalf, 'listen to the words of the Steward of Gondor  
before he died: You may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for a day, but 
against the Power that has  now arisen there is no victory. I do not bid you  
despair, as he did, but to ponder the truth in these words. 

####-     'The  Stones of Seeing do  not lie, and not even  the Lord of Barad-dyr 
can make  them do so. He can, maybe, by his will choose what things shall be 
seen by weaker minds, or cause them to mistake the meaning of what they see. 
Nonetheless it cannot be doubted that when Denethor saw great forces arrayed 
against him  in Mordor,  and more  still being gathered, he  saw  that which 
truly is. 
     'Hardly has our strength sufficed to beat off the first  grea t assault. 
The next will be greater.  This war  then is without final hope, as Denethor  
perceived. Victory  cannot be  achieved by  arms, whether  you sit  here  to 
endure siege after siege, or  march  out to be overwhelmed beyond the River. 
You  have  only a  choice  of  evils;  and prudence  would  counsel  you  to 
strengthen such strong places as you have, and there await the onset; for so 
shall the time before your end be made a little longer.' 
     'Then you would have  us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol  Amroth, or to 
Dunharrow, and  there sit  like children on  sand-castles when  the tide  is 
flowing?' said Imrahil. 
     'That would  be no new  counsel,' said Gandalf. 'Have you not done this 
and  little more in all the  days of Denethor?  But no! I sa id this would be 
prudent. I do not counsel prudence. I said  victory could not be achieved by 
arms. I still hope for victory, but not by arms.  For into the midst  of all 
these policies comes the Ring of Power, the foundation of Barad-dyr, and the 
hope of Sauron. 
     'Concerning  this  thing,  my  lords, you now  all know enough for  the 
understanding of our plight, and of  Sauron's. If he regains it, your valour 
is  vain, and his victory will be swift and complete: so  complete that none 
can foresee the  end of it while this world lasts. If it is destroyed,  then 
he will fall; and his  fall will be so low that none can foresee his arising 
ever again. For he will lose the best part of the  strength  that was native 
to him in his beginning, and all that was made or begun with that power will  
crumble, and he will  be maimed  for ever, becoming a mere  spirit of malice 
that  gnaws itself in the shadows, but cannot again grow  or take shape. And 
so a great evil of this world will be removed. 
     'Other evils there are  that may come;  for  Sauron  is  himself  but a  
servant or emissary.  Yet it is  not our part to master all the tides of the 
world, but to do what is in us for the succour of those years wherein we are 
set, uprooting the  evil in the fields that we know, so  that those who live 
after may have clean earth to till. What weather they shall have is not ours 

####-to rule. 
     'Now Sauron knows all this, and he knows that this precious thing which 
he lost has been found again; but he does not yet know where it is, or so we 
hope. And therefore he is now  in great doubt. For  if we  have  found  this 
thing, there are some among us with strength enough to wield it. That too he 
knows. For do I not guess rightly, Aragorn, that you have shown  yourself to 
him in the Stone of Orthanc?' 
     'I did so  ere I rode from the Hornburg,' answered  Aragorn. 'I  deemed 
that the time was ripe, and that the  Stone had  come to me  for just such a  
purpose. It was  then ten  days since the Ring-bearer went east from Rauros,  
and the Eye of Sauron, I thought, should be drawn out from his own land. Too 
seldom has he been challenged since he  returned to his  Tower. Though if  I 
had foreseen how swift would be his onset in answer, maybe I should not have 
dared to show myself. Bare time was given me to come to your aid.' 
     'But how is  this?' asked Jomer. 'All is  vain, you say,  if he has the 
Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?' 
     'He is not yet sure,' said Gandalf, 'and  he has not built up his power 
by waiting until his enemies are secure,  as we have done. Also we could not  
learn how to wield the  full  power all in a day. Indeed it can be used only 
by one master alone, not by many; and he will look for a time of strife, ere 
one  of the great among us makes himself master and puts down the others. In 
that time the Ring might aid him, if he were sudden. 
     'He  is  watching. He sees  much and hears much.  His Nazgyl  are still 
abroad. They passed over this field ere the sunrise, though few of the  weary 
and sleeping were aware of them. He studies the signs: the Sword that robbed 
him of his treasure re-made; the winds of fortune turning in our favour, and 
the defeat unlooked-for of his first assault the fall of his great Captain. 
     'His doubt will  be  growing, even  as we  speak here. His  Eye is  now 
straining towards us,  blind  almost to all  else that is moving. So we must 
keep it. Therein  lies all our hope. This, then, is my  counsel. We have not 
the Ring. In wisdom or  great folly it has been sent away  to be  destroyed, 
lest it destroy  us. Without it we  cannot by force defeat his force. But we 
must  at all  costs  keep his Eye  from his true  peril. We  cannot  achieve 
victory  by  arms, but by arms we can give the Ring-bearer his  only chance, 
frail though it be. 
     'As Aragorn has begun, so  we must go  on. We must push  Sauron  to his 
last throw. We must call out his hidden strength, so that he shall empty his 

####-land. We must march out to meet him at  once.  We  must  make ourselves  the 
bait, though his jaws  should close  on us. He will take that bait,  in hope 
and in  greed, for he will think that in  such rashness he sees the pride of 
the new Ringlord: and he will say: "So!  he pushes out his neck too soon and 
too far. Let him come on, and behold I will have him in a trap from which he 
cannot escape.  There  I  will  crush  him, and  what he  has taken  in  his 
insolence shall be mine again for ever." 
     'We must walk open-eyed into that  trap, with courage,  but small  hope 
for ourselves.  For, my  lords,  it may  well prove  that we ourselves shall 
perish utterly in  a black battle far from the living lands; so that even if 
Barad-dyr  be thrown down, we shall not live to  see a new age.  But this, I 
deem, is our  duty. And better so than  to perish nonetheless - as we surely 
shall, if we sit here  - and know as we die that no new age shall be.' 
     They were  silent for a while.  At  length Aragorn  spoke.  'As  I have 
begun, so I  will go on.  We  come  now  to the  very brink, where hope  and 
despair are akin. To waver is to fall.  Let none  now reject the counsels of 
Gandalf,  whose long labours against  Sauron come at last to their test. But 
for him all would long ago have been lost. Nonetheless I do not yet claim to  
command any man. Let others choose as they will.' 
     Then said Elrohir: 'From the North we came with this purpose,  and from 
Elrond our father we brought this very counsel. We will not turn back.' 
     'As for  myself,'  said Jomer, 'I have little knowledge of  these  deep 
matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough, that as my friend 
Aragorn succoured  me and my people, so I will aid him when he calls. I will 
go.' 
     'As  for  me,'  said  Imrahil,  'the  Lord  Aragorn  I  hold to  be  my 
liege-lord, whether he  claim it or no. His wish  is to me a command. I will 
go also. Yet for a  while I stand in the place of the Steward of Gondor, and 
it is mine to think first of its people. To prudence some heed must still be 
given. For we must prepare against  all chances, good as well as  evil. Now,  
it may be that we shall triumph, and while there is any hope of this, Gondor  
must be protected.  I  would not have us return  with victory  to a City  in 
ruins and a land ravaged behind us. And yet we learn from the  Rohirrim that 
there is an army still unfought upon our northern flank.' 
     'That is true,' said Gandalf. 'I  do not  counsel you to leave the City 
all unmanned.  Indeed  the force that  we lead east need not be great enough 
for any  assault in earnest   upon Mordor, so  long as it be great enough  to 

####-challenge battle. And it must move soon.  Therefore I ask the Captains: what 
force could we muster and lead out in two days' time at the latest? And they 
must be hardy men that go willingly, knowing their peril.' 
     'All are weary,  and very  many have  wounds  light  or grievous,' said 
Jomer,  'and  we have suffered  much loss of our horses, and that  is ill to 
bear. If we must ride soon, then I cannot  hope to  lead even two thousands, 
and yet leave as ma ny for the defence of the City.' 
     'We have not only to reckon with those who fought  on this field ' said 
Aragorn.  'New strength is on the way from the southern fiefs, now  that the 
coasts have been  rid. Four thousands I sent marching from Pelargir  through  
Lossarnach two days  ago; and  Angbor the fearless rides  before them. If we 
set out in two days  more,  they will draw nigh ere we depart. Moreover many 
were bidden to  follow me up the River  in  any craft they could gather; and 
with this wind they  will soon be at hand, indeed several ships have already 
come to the Harlond. I judge that we could lead out seven thousands of horse 
and foot, and yet  leave the City  in better defence  than it  was  when the 
assault began.' 
     'The Gate  is destroyed,' said Imrahil, 'and where now is the skill  to 
rebuild it and set it up anew?' 
     'In Erebor  in  the Kingdom of Dbin there is such skill,' said Aragorn; 
'and  if all our hopes do not perish, then in time I will send Gimli Gluin's 
son to ask for wrights of  the Mountain. But  men are better than gates, and 
no gate will endure against our Enemy if men desert it.' 
     This then was the end of the debate  of the lords: that they should set 
forth on the  second  morning from that day with  seven thousands, if  these 
might  be found; and the great part of this force should be on foot, because 
of the  evil lands  into which they would go. Aragorn  should  find some two 
thousands  of those that he  had  gathered to him  in the South; but Imrahil 
should find  three  and  a half thousands;  and Jomer  five  hundreds  of the 
Rohirrim who  were unhorsed but themselves warworthy, and he himself  
should 
lead five hundreds of his  best Riders on horse; and another company of five 
hundred horse there  should be,  among which should ride the sons  of Elrond 
with  the D®nedain and the knights of Dol Amroth: all told six thousand foot 
and a thousand horse. But the main strength  of the  Rohirrim  that remained 
horsed and able to  fight, some three thousand under the command of Elfhelm, 
should waylay the West Road against  the enemy that was in  Anurien. And  at 

####-once swift riders were sent out to gather  what news they could  northwards;  
and eastwards from Osgiliath and the road to Minas Morgul. 
     And when they  had reck oned up all their strength and taken thought for  
the  journeys  they should  make  and the  roads they should choose, Imrahil  
suddenly laughed aloud. 
     'Surely,' he cried, 'this is  the greatest jest  in  all the history of 
Gondor:  that  we should  ride with seven thousands,  scarce  as many as the 
vanguard of its army in  the days of its power, to assail the mountains  and 
the impenetrable  gate  of the  Black Land!  So  might  a  child  threaten a  
mail-clad knight with a bow of string and green  willow! If  the  Dark  Lord 
knows so  much as you say, Mithrandir,  will  he not rather smile than fear, 
and with his little finger crush us like a fly that tries to sting him?' 
     'No, he  will try to  trap  the fly  and take the sting,' said Gandalf. 
'And there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand  mail -clad 
knights apiece. No, he will not smile.' 
     'Neither  shall  we,'  said Aragorn. 'If this be  jest, then it is  too 
bitter for laughter.  Nay, it is the last  move in a great jeopardy, and for 
one  side or  the other  it  will bring the end of the game.' Then  he  drew 
And®ril and  held it up glittering  in the sun. 'You shall  not  be sheathed 
again until the last battle is fought;' he said. 
 

####- 

Chapter 10. The Black Gate Opens 

 
 
     Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the  Pelennor.  
The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of Anurien, but harried 
and scattered by the Rohirrim they had  broken and fled with little fighting 
towards Cair  Andros;  and with  that  threat  destroyed  and  new  strength 
arriving out of the South the City  was as well  manned  as might be. Scouts 
reported  that  no  enemies remained  upon the  roads  east  as  far  as the 
Cross-roads of the Fallen King. All now was ready for the last throw.  
     Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn 
and Gandalf, who went in the  van with the D®nedain  and the sons of Elrond. 
But Merry to his shame was not to go with them. 
     'You are  not fit for  such a  journey,' said  Aragorn. 'But  do not be 
ashamed.  If  you do no  more  in  this  war, you have already earned  great 
honour. Peregrin shall go and represent the Shirefolk; and do not grudge him 
his chance of peril, for  though  he has done as well as his fortune allowed 
him, he has yet to match your deed. But in truth all now are in like danger. 
Though it may be our part to  find bitter end before the  Gate of Mordor, if 
we do so,  then you will come also to a last  stand, either here or wherever  
the black tide overtakes you. Farewell!' 
     And  so  despondently Merry now  stood and watched the mustering of the 
army. Bergil was with him, and  he  also was downcast; for his father was to 
march leading a company of the  Men  of the City:  he could not  rejoin  the 
Guard until his case was judged. In that same company Pippin was also to go, 
as a soldier of Gondor. Merry could see him not far off, a small but upright 
figure among the tall men of Minas Tirith. 
     At last the  trumpets  rang and the army began to move. Troop by troop, 
and company by company,  they wheeled and went off  eastward. And long 
after 
they had passed away out of sight down the great road to the Causeway, Merry 
stood there. The  last glint of the morning sun  on  spear and helm twinkled 
and was lost, and still he remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling 
friendless  and  alone. Everyone  that  he cared for had  gone away into the 
gloom  that  hung over the distant eastern sky;  and little  hope at all was 
left in his heart that he wou ld ever see any of them again. 

####-     As if recalled by his mood of despair,  the  pain in his arm  returned, 
and he felt weak and old, and the sunlight seemed thin. He was roused by the 
touch of Bergil's hand. 
     'Come, Master Perian!' said the lad. 'You are still  in pain, I see.  I 
will help you back to the Healers. But do not fear! They will come back. The 
Men  of  Minas Tirith  will never be overcome. And  now they  have the  Lord 
Elfstone, and Beregond of the Guard too.' 
     Ere  noon the army  came  to  Osgiliath.  There  all  the  workers  and 
craftsmen  that  could  be  spared were  busy. Some were  strengthening  the 
ferries and boat-bridges that the  enemy had made and in part destroyed when 
they fled; some  gathered  stores and booty; and others  on the eastern side 
across the River were throwing up hasty works of defence. 
     The vanguard passed on through the ruins  of  Old Gondor, and  over the 
wide River, and  on up the long straight road that in the high days had been 
made to run  from the fair  Tower of the Sun to the tall  Tower of the Moon,  
which now was Minas Morgul in its accursed vale. Five miles beyond Osgiliath 
they halted, ending their first day's march. 
     But  the  horsemen  pressed  on  and  ere  evening  they  came  to  the 
Cross-roads and the great ring of trees, and all was silent. No sign of  any 
enemy  had they seen, no cry or  call had been heard, no shaft had sped from 
rock or  thicket by the  way, yet  ever as they went  forward  they felt the 
watchfulness  of  the land  increase. Tree and stone,  blade  and leaf  were 
listening. The darkness had been dispelled, and far away westward sunset was 
on the  Vale of  Anduin, and the white peaks of the mountains blushed in the  
blue air; but a shadow and a gloom brooded upon the Ephel D®ath. 
     Then Aragorn set trumpeters at each of the four roads that ran into the 
ring  of trees,  and they blew a great fanfare, and the heralds cried aloud: 
'The Lords  of Gondor have returned  and all this  land  that is theirs they 
take back.'  The  hideous orc-head that  was  set upon the carven figure was 
cast down and  broken in pieces, and the old king's head was raised  and set 
in its place once more, still crowned with white and golden flowers: and men 
laboured  to wash and pare away all the foul scrawls that orcs  had put upon  
the stone. 
     Now in their debate  some had counselled that Minas Morgul should first  
be assailed, and if  they  might take  it,  it should  be utterly destroyed. 
'And, maybe,'  said Imrahil, 'the road that leads thence to  the pass  above 
will prove  an easier way of  assault upon the Dark Lord  than  his northern 

####-gate.' 
     But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of  the evil that 
dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn to madness and 
horror, and because also of the  news  that Faramir had brought.  For if the 
Ring-bearer had indeed attempted that  way,  then above  all they should not 
draw the Eye of Mordor thither.  So the next day when the main host came up, 
they set a strong guard upon the Cross-roads to make some defence, if Mordor  
should send a force  over the Morgul Pass, or should bring  more men up from 
the South. For that guard  they chose mostly archers  who knew  the ways  of 
Ithilien and would lie hid in the woods and slopes about the meeting  of the 
ways. But Gandalf and Aragorn rode with the  vanguard  to  the  entrance  of 
Morgul Vale and looked on the evil city. 
     It was dark and  lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of  Mordor  
that  had  dwelt  there had been destroyed in  battle,  and the  Nazgyl were 
abroad. Yet the air of the valley was heavy  with fear and enmity. Then they 
broke the evil bridge and set red flames in the noisome fields and departed. 
     The  day  after, being the  third day  since they  set  out  from Minas 
Tirith, the army  began its  northward  march along  the  road.  It was some 
hundred  miles by that  way  from the  Cross-roads to the Morannon, and what 
might befall  them before they  came so  far  none knew They went openly but 
heedfully, with mounted scouts before them  on the road, and others on  foot 
upon either  side, especially  on  the  eastward flank;  for there lay  dark 
thickets, and  a tumbled  land of rocky ghylls  and crags,  behind which the 
long  grim slopes of the Ephel D®ath clambered up. The weather of  the world 
remained fair and the wind held in the west, but nothing could waft away the 
glooms  and the sad  mists  that clung  about  the Mountains of  Shadow; and 
behind them at whiles great smokes would arise and hover in the upper winds.  
     Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets, and the heralds would cry:  
"The  Lords of Gondor are come! Let  all leave this land  or yield them up!' 
But Imrahil said: 'Say not  The Lords of Gondor.  Say The King Elessar.  For 
that is true, even though he has  not yet  sat  upon the throne; and it will 
give the Enemy more thought, if  the  heralds use that name.' And thereafter  
thrice a day the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar. But none 
answered the challenge. 
     Nonetheless, though they marched in seeming  peace,  the hearts  of all 
the army, from the highest to the lowest, were downcast, and with every mile 
that they went  north foreboding  of evil grew heavier  on them. It was near 

####-the  end of the second day of their  march  from  the Cross-roads  that they 
first met any offer  of battle.  For a strong force  of Orcs and Easterlings 
attempted to  take their leading companies in an ambush; and that was in the 
very place where Faramir  had waylaid the men of Harad, and the road went in 
a deep cutting through an out-thrust of the eastward hills. But the Captains 
of the West were well warned by their scouts, skilled men from Henneth 
Annyn 
led by Mablung; and so the ambush was itself trapped. For horsemen went 
wide 
about westward and  came  up on the flank of  the enemy and from behind, and 
they were destroyed or driven east into the hills. 
     But  the victory did  little to  enhearten the captains.  'It  is but a  
feint,' said Aragorn; 'and its chief purpose, I  deem, was  rather to draw us 
on by a false guess of our Enemy's weakness than to  do us much hurt,  yet.' 
And from that evening onward the Nazgyl came and followed every move  of 
the 
army. They still  flew  high and out  of sight of all  save Legolas, and  yet 
their presence could  be felt, as a deepening of shadow and a dimming of the  
sun; and though the Ringwraiths did not  yet stoop low upon  their foes  and  
were silent, uttering no cry, the dread of them could not be shaken off. 
     So time and  the hopeless  journey wore away. Upon the fourth day  from  
the Cross-roads and the sixth from Minas Tirith they came at last to the end 
of  the living lands,  and began to pass into the desolation that lay before 
the gates of the Pass of Cirith Gorgor; and  they could  descry the  marshes 
and the desert that  stretched north and west to  the Emyn Muil. So desolate 
were those places and so  deep  the horror that lay on them that some of the 
host were unmanned, and they could neither walk nor ride further north. 
     Aragorn looked  at them,  and there was pity  in his  eyes  rather than 
wrath;  for  these were young men from Rohan,  from Westfold  far  away,  or  
husbandmen  from  Lossarnach, and to them Mordor had been  from childhood  
a 
name  of evil,  and yet  unreal, a  legend that had no part in  their simple 
life; and now  they walked like men in a  hideous dream made true,  and they 
understood not this war nor why fate should lead them to such a pass.  
     'Go!' said Aragorn. 'But  keep what honour you may, and do not run! And 
there is a task which you may attempt and so be not wholly shamed. Take your 
way  south-west till you come to Cair Andros, and  if that is still  held by  

####-enemies, as I think, then re-take it, if you can; and hold it to the last in 
defence of Gondor and Rohan!' 
     Then some being shamed by  his mercy  overcame their fear and  went on, 
and the others took new hope, hearing of a manful  deed within their measure 
that  they  could turn to, and they  departed.  And so,  since many men  had 
already  been left  at the Cross-roads,  it was with less than six thousands 
that the Captains of the West came at last  to challenge the  Black Gate and 
the might of Mordor. 
     They advanced  now slowly, expecting at every hour some answer to their 
challenge, and they drew together, since it was but waste of men to send out 
scouts or small parties from the main host. At nightfall of the fifth day of 
the march from Morgul Vale they made their last camp, and set fires about it  
of such dead wood and  heath as they  could find. They  passed the hours  of 
night  in  wakefulness  and they were aware  of many things  half-seen  that 
walked and prowled all about them, and they heard the howling of wolves. The 
wind had  died  and all  the air  seemed still. They  could see  little, for  
though it was cloudless and the waxing moon was four nights  old, there were 
smokes  and  fumes  that rose  out of the earth and  the white  crescent was 
shrouded in the mists of Mordor. 
     It grew cold. As morning came the wind bega n to stir again,  but now it 
came from  the North,  and  soon it  freshened to a  rising breeze. All  the 
night-walkers were gone, and the land seemed empty. North amid their 
noisome 
pits lay the first of the great heaps and hills of slag and broken  rock and 
blasted earth,  the vomit of the maggot-folk of Mordor;  but south  and  now 
near loomed the great rampart of Cirith Gorgor, and the Black Gate amidmost, 
and the two Towers of the Teeth tall and dark upon either side. For in their 
last march  the Capta ins had turned away from the old road as it  bent east,  
and avoided the peril of the lurking hills, and so now they were approaching 
the Morannon from the north-west, even as Frodo had done. 
     The two  vast iron doors of the Black Gate under its frowning arch were 
fast closed. Upon the battlement nothing could be seen. All was  silent  but 
watchful. They  were come to the last end of their folly, and stood  forlorn 
and chill in the grey light of early day before towers and walls which their 
army could not assault with hope, not even if it had brought thither engines 
of great power, and  the Enemy had no more force than would suffice  for the 
manning of  the gate  and wall alone. Yet  they  knew that all the hills and 

####-rocks  about  the Morannon  were filled with hidden  foes, and  the  shadowy 
defile beyond was bored and tunnelled  by teeming broods of evil things. And 
as they stood they saw all the Nazgyl gathered together, hovering  above the 
Towers of the Teeth like vultures; and they knew that they were watched. But 
still the Enemy made no sign. 
     No  choice was left them but to play their part  to  its end. Therefore 
Aragorn now set the host in such array as could  best be contrived; and they  
were drawn up on two great  hills of blasted stone and earth  that orcs  had 
piled in years of labour. Before them towards Mordor lay like a moat a great 
mire  of  reeking  mud and foul-smelling  pools. When all  was  ordered, the 
Captains rode  forth towards the Black Gate with  a great  guard of horsemen 
and  the  banner and heralds  and  trumpeters.  There  was Gandalf as  chief 
herald,  and  Aragorn  with  the sons of Elrond,  and  Jomer  of Rohan,  and 
Imrahil; and Legolas and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to  go also, so that 
all the enemies of Mordor should have a witness. 
     They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner, and blew 
upon their trumpets; and the heralds stood out and sent their voices up over  
the battlement of Mordor. 
     'Come forth!'  they cried. 'Let the Lord of the Black   Land come forth!  
Justice shall be done upon  him. For wrongfully he  has made war upon Gondor  
and  wrested its lands. Therefore the King  of Gondor demands that he should 
atone for his evils, and depart then for ever. Come forth!' 
     There was  a long  silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound  was 
heard in  answer. But Sauron had already laid his plans,  and he had a  mind  
first to play these mice cruelly before he struck to kill.  So  it was that, 
even  as  the  Captains were about to  turn  away, the  silence  was  broken 
suddenly.  There came  a  long rolling  of great  drums like thunder in  the 
mountains,  and  then  a  braying  of horns that  shook the very  stones and 
stunned men's ears.  And thereupon the  middle  door  of the Black Gate  was 
thrown open with a great clang, and out of it there came an embassy from the 
Dark Tower. 
     At its  head there rode a  tall  and evil  shape, mounted  upon a black  
horse, if  horse it was;  for it was huge  and hideous,  and its face was  a  
frightful mask, more like a skull than a living head,  and in the sockets of 
its eyes and in its nostrils there burned a flame. The  rider was robed  all 
in  black, and black was his lofty helm;  yet this  was  no Ringwraith but a  
living man. The Lieutenant of the Tower of Barad-dyr he was, and his name is 

####-remembered  in no  tale; for he himself had forgotten it, and he said: 'I am 
the Mouth of Sauron.' But it is told that he was a renegade, who came of the 
race of those  that are named the Black  N®menureans;  for   they established 
their dwellings in Middle-earth during the years of Sauron's domination, and 
they worshipped him, being enamoured  of evil knowledge.  And he entered the 
service of the  Dark Tower when it  first rose again,  and  because  of  his 
cunning  he grew  ever  higher  in the Lord's favour;  and  he learned  great 
sorcery, and knew much of the mind of Sauron; and he was more cruel than 
any 
orc. 
     He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small company  of 
black-harnessed soldiery, a nd a  single  banner, black but  bearing on it in 
red the Evil Eye. Now halting a few paces before the Captains of the West he 
looked them up and down and laughed. 
     'Is  there  anyone in this rout  with authority to treat  with me?'  he 
asked. 'Or indeed with wit to  understand me? Not thou at least!' he mocked, 
turning to Aragorn with scorn. 'It needs more to make a king than a piece of 
elvish glass, or a rabble  such as this. Why, any brigand  of the  hills can 
show as good a following!' 
     Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other's eye and held it, 
and for a moment they strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn did not stir nor  
move hand to weapon, the other  quailed and  gave back as if menaced with  a  
blow. 'I am a herald and ambassador, a nd may not be assailed!' he cried. 
     'Where such  laws hold,'  said  Gandalf, 'it is  also  the  custom  for  
ambassadors to use less insolence. But  no one  has threatened you. You have 
naught to fear  from us,  until your errand is done. But unless  your master  
has  come  to new  wisdom, then with all  his servants  you will be in great 
peril.' 
     'So!' said the  Messenger. 'Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard?  
Have we not  heard of  thee at whiles, and  of thy wanderings, ever hatching 
plots a nd mischief at a safe distance? But this time thou hast stuck out thy 
nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt see what comes to him  who sets 
his foolish webs before  the feet of Sauron the Great. I have  tokens that I 
was bidden  to show to thee -  to thee in especial, if thou shouldst dare to 
come.' He signed to  one of his guards, and he came forward bearing a bundle 
swathed in black cloths.  
     The Messenger put  these  aside, and there to the wonder and  dismay of 

####-all the Captains he held up first the short sword that Sam had carried,  and 
next a grey  cloak with  an elven-brooch,  and last the coat of mithril-mail 
that  Frodo  had  worn  wrapped  in  his tattered garments. A blackness came  
before their eyes,  and it seemed  to  them in a moment of  silence that the 
world  stood  still,  but their  hearts were dead and their last  hope gone. 
Pippin who stood behind Prince Imrahil sprang forward with a cry of grief.  
     'Silence!' said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back;  but the Messenger  
laughed aloud. 
     'So you  have yet another of these imps  with you!' he cried. 'What use 
you  find in them I cannot guess; but to send them as  spies into Mordor  is 
beyond even your  accustomed folly. Still, I thank him, for it is plain that 
this brat  at  least has seen these tokens  before, and it would be vain for 
you to deny them now.' 
     'I do not wish to  deny  them,' said Gandalf. 'Indeed, I know them  all 
and all  their history,  and despite your scorn,  foul Mouth of  Sauron, you  
cannot say as much. But why do you bring them here?' 
     'Dwarf-coat,  elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from the 
little rat-land  of the Shire-nay; do not  start! We know it well - here are 
the marks  of a  conspiracy. Now,  maybe  he that bore  these  things was  a  
creature that you would not grieve to lose, and maybe otherwise: one dear to  
you, perhaps? If so, take swift counsel with what little wit is left to you. 
For  Sauron does not love  spies, and what his fate  shall be depends now on 
your choice.' 
     No one answered him;  but he  saw their faces  grey with  fear and  the 
horror  in their eyes, and he laughed again, for it  seemed to him  that his 
sport went well. 'Good, good!' he  said. 'He was dear to you, I see. Or else 
his  errand was one that you did not wish to fail? It  has. And now he shall 
endure the slow torment of years, as long and  slow as our arts in the Great 
Tower can contrive, and never  be released,  unless maybe when he is changed 
and  broken,  so  that  he may come  to you, and you  shall see what you have  
done. This shall surely be-unless you accept my Lord's terms.' 
     'Name  the  terms,'  said Gandalf steadily,  but  those nearby  saw the 
anguish in  his  face,  and now he  seemed an  old and wizened man, crushed, 
defeated at la st. They did not doubt that he would accept. 
     'These are the terms,' said the  Messenger, and smiled as he eyed  them 
one by one. 'The rabble of  Gondor and  its deluded allies shall withdraw at 
once beyond the Anduin, first taking oaths never  again to assail Sauron the 

####-Great  in arms, open or  secret. All lands east of Anduin  shall be Sauron's 
for  ever, solely. West of the Anduin as  far as the Misty Mountains and the 
Gap of Rohan  shall  be tributary to  Mordor,  and men  there  shall bear no 
weapons, but shall  have leave to govern  their own affairs. But  they shall 
help  to rebuild Isengard which they have wantonly destroyed, and that shall 
be Sauron's, and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more 
worthy of trust.' 
     Looking in  the Messenger's  eyes they read his thought.  He was to  be  
that lieutenant, and gather all that remained of the West under his sway; he 
would be their tyrant and they his slaves.  
     But Gandalf said:  'This is much  to demand for  the  delivery  of  one 
servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else fight  
many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed his hope in war, so 
that  he falls to haggling? And  if indeed we rated this  prisoner  so high, 
what  surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his 
part? Where  is this prisoner?  Let him be brought forth and yielded to  us,  
and then we will consider these demands.' 
     It  seemed then to Gandalf,  intent, watching  him as a  man engaged in 
fencing with a deadly foe, that for the taking of a breath the Messenger was 
at a loss; yet swiftly he laughed again. 
     'Do  not bandy words in  your  insolence with  the Mouth of Sauron!' he 
cried. 'Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemency you  
must first do his bidding. These are his terms. Take them or leave them!' 
     'These  we will take!' said Gandalf suddenly. He cast  aside  his cloak 
and a white  light shone forth like a sword in that black  place. Before his 
upraised hand   the  foul Messenger recoiled, and  Gandalf  coming seized and 
took from him  the tokens: coat,  cloak, and sword. 'These we  will take  in 
memory of our friend,' he cried.  'But  as for your  terms, we  reject  them 
utterly. Get you gone, for your embassy is over and death is near to you. We 
did not  come here  to waste words in treating  with Sauron,  faithless  and 
accursed; still less with one of his slaves. Begone!' 
     Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was twisted with 
amazement and anger to the  likeness of some wild beast that, as it crouches 
on  its  prey, is smitten on the muzzle with a stinging rod. Rage filled him 
and his mouth  slavered, and shapeless  sounds of fury came  strangling from 
his throat. But he looked at the fell faces of the Captains and their deadly 
eyes, and fear overcame his wrath. He  gave a great cry, and  turned, leaped 

####-upon his  steed, and with his company galloped madly back to  Cirith Gorgor. 
But  as they went his soldiers blew their horns in signal long arranged; and 
even before they came to the gate Sauron sprang his trap. 
     Drums rolled and fires leaped up.  The  great doors  of the  Black Gate 
swung  back wide. Out  of  it streamed a great host  as  swiftly as swirling 
waters when a sluice is lifted. 
     The Captains mounted  again  and rode back, and from the host of Mordor 
there went up a jeering yell. Dust  rose smothering the air,  as from nearby 
there marched up an army of Easterlings  that  had  waited for the signal in 
the shadows of Ered Lithui beyond the further Tower.  Down from the hills on 
either side of  the  Morannon poured Orcs innumerable. The men of  the  West  
were  trapped, and soon. all about  the grey mounds where they stood, forces 
ten times and more than ten times  their  match  would ring them in a sea of 
enemies. Sauron had taken the proffered bait in jaws of steel. 
     Little  time was left to Aragorn for the ordering  of  his battle. Upon 
the one hill he  stood with Gandalf, and there fair and desperate was raised 
the  ba nner of  the  Tree and  Stars.  Upon the other hill hard by stood the 
banners of Rohan and Dol Amroth, White Horse and Silver Swan. And about 
each 
hill a ring was made facing all ways, bristling with spear and sword. But in 
the front  towards Mordor  where the  first bitter  assault would come there 
stood the sons of Elrond on  the left with the D®nedain  about them,  and on 
the right  the  Prince Imrahil with the men of Dol Amroth tall and fair, and 
picked men of the Tower of Guard. 
     The  wind blew, and the trumpets sang, and  arrows whined; but the  sun 
now  climbing  towards  the South was  veiled  in the reeks  of Mordor,  and 
through a threatening haze it  gleamed, remote, a  sullen red, as if it were 
the ending of the day, or the  end maybe of all the world of  light. And out 
of the gathering  mirk the Nazgyl came with. their  cold voices crying words 
of death; and then all hope was quenched. 
     Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when  he  heard Gandalf reject the  
terms and  doom Frodo  to the torment  of  the  Tower;  but  he had mastered  
himself, and now he  stood beside Beregond in the front  rank of Gondor with 
Imrahil's men. For  it seemed best to him to die  soon and  leave the bitter  
story of his life, since all was in ruin. 
     'I wish Merry  was here,' he  heard himself saying, and quick  thoughts 
raced  through his mind, even as he watched  the enemy  come charging to the 

####-assault. 'Well, well, now at  any rate  I understand  poor Denethor a little 
better. We might die together, Merry and  I, and since die we must, why not? 
Well, as he is not  here, I hope he'll find an easier end. But now I must do 
my best.' 
     He drew  his sword and looked at it, and the intertwining shapes of red 
and gold; and  the flowing characters of N®menor glinted like fire upon  the 
blade. 'This was made for just  such an hour,' he thought. 'If only  I could 
smite that foul Messenger with  it, then almost I should draw level with old 
Merry.  Well, I'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I 
could see cool sunlight and green grass again!' 
     Then  even  as he thought  these things the  first assault crashed into 
them.  The orcs hindered by the  mires that  lay before the hills halted and 
poured their arrows into the defending ranks.  But through them  there  came 
striding  up,  roaring  like beasts, a  great company of  hill-trolls out of 
Gorgoroth. Taller and broader than Men they were, and they were clad only in 
close-fitting mesh of  horny  scales, or maybe  that was their hideous hide; 
but they bore round  bucklers  huge and black and wielded heavy  hammers  in 
their  knotted hands.  Reckless they sprang into the pools and waded across,  
bellowing as they came. Like a  storm they broke upon the line of the men of 
Gondor, and beat upon helm and head, and arm and shield as smiths hewing the 
hot bending iron. At Pippin's  side Beregond was stunned  and overborne, and 
he fell;  and the great  troll-chief that  smote  him  down  bent over  him, 
reaching out  a  clutching  claw; for  these  fell creatures would bite  the 
throats of those that they threw down. 
     Then  Pippin  stabbed  upwards, and  the  written blade of  Westernesse 
pierced through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the troll, and his 
black blood came gushing out. He toppled forward and came crashing down 
like 
a falling rock, burying those beneath him. Blackness and stench and crushing 
pain came upon Pippin, and his mind fell away into a great darkness. 
     'So  it ends  as I  guessed  it  would,' his  thought said,  even as it 
fluttered away; and  it laughed a little within him ere it fled, almost  gay 
it seemed to  be  casting off at last all doubt and care and  fear. And then 
even as  it  winged away into forgetfulness it heard voices, and they seemed 
to be crying in some forgotten world far above: 
     'The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming!' 
     For one moment more Pippin's thought hovered.  'Bilbo!'  it  said. 'But 

####-no! That came in his tale, long long  ago. This is my  tale, and it is ended 
now. Good-bye!' And his thought fled far away and his eyes saw no more. 
 
 

####- 

 
 

 * BOOK VI *  

Chapter 1. The Tower of Cirith Ungol 

 
 
     Sam roused himself painfully from the ground. For a  moment he wondered 
where he was, and then all the misery and despair returned to him. He was in 
the deep dark outside the  under -gate of the orcs'  stronghold;  its  brazen 
doors were shut. He must have fallen  stunned when he hurled himself against  
them; but  how  long he had lain there he did not know. Then he  had been on 
fire, desperate and furious;  now he was shivering and cold. He crept to the 
doors and pressed his ears against them. 
     Far  within  he  could hear  faintly the voices of ores clamouring, but 
soon they stopped or  passed out of hearing,  and  all was still.  His  head 
ached and his eyes saw phantom lights in  the  darkness, but he struggled to 
steady  himself and  think. It  was clear at any rate that he had no hope of 
getting into the orc-hold by that gate; he might wait  there for days before 
it was opened, and he could  not wait: time  was  desperately precious. He no 
longer had any doubt about his duty: he must rescue  his master or perish in 
the attempt. 
     'The  perishing is more  likely, and will be a lot  easier  anyway,' he 
said grimly to  himself,  as  he sheathed Sting and turned  from  the brazen 
doors. Slowly  he  groped his  way back in  the dark along  the  tunnel, not 
daring to  use the elven -light; and as  he went he tried to fit together the 
events since Frodo and he  had left  the  Cross-roads. He  wondered what the 
time  was. Somewhere between one day and the next, he supposed;  but even of 
the days he had  quite lost count. He  was in a  land  of darkness where the 
days of the world seemed forgotten, and where all who entered were forgotten 
too. 
     'I wonder if they  think of us at all,' he said, 'and what is happening 
to them all away there.' He  waved his  hand vaguely  in the air before him; 
but  he  was  in fact now facing southwards,  as  he  came back to  Shelob's 
tunnel, not  west. Out westward in the world it was drawing to noon upon the 
fourteenth day of  March in the  Shire-reckoning. And  even now  Aragorn was 
leading  the  black  fleet  from  Pelargir,  and  Merry was riding with  the 

####-Rohirrim down the Stonewain Valley, while in Minas Tirith flames were rising 
and Pippin watched the madness growing in the eyes of Denethor. Yet amid all 
their cares and  fear  the thoughts of  their friends  turned  constantly to 
Frodo and Sam. They were not forgotten. But they were far beyond aid, and no 
thought could yet  bring any help to Samwise  Hamfast's son; he was  utterly 
alone. 
 
     He came back at last to the  stone door of the  orc-passage, and  still 
unable to  discover the catch  or bolt that held it,  he scrambled  over  as 
before and dropped softly to  the ground. Then he made his way stealthily to 
the  outlet of Shelob's tunnel, where the rags  of  her great web were still 
blowing and swaying in the  cold airs. For cold they seemed to Sam after the  
noisome darkness behind;  but the  breath of  them  revived  him.  He  crept 
cautiously out. 
     All was ominously quiet.  The light was no more than that of dusk  at a  
dark day's end. The vast vapours that  arose in  Mordor and  went  streaming 
westward passed  low overhead,  a  great  welter of cloud and smoke now  lit 
again beneath with a sullen glow of red. 
     Sam  looked up  towards the orc-tower, and  suddenly  from  its  narrow 
windows lights stared out like small red eyes. He wondered if they were some 
signal.  His fear  of  the orcs,  forgot ten  for  a  while  in his wrath and 
desperation,  now returned. As  far  as he  could  see, there  was only  one 
possible course  for him to take: he  must go on  and try to find  the  main 
entrance to  the dreadful tower; but his knees  felt weak, and he  found that 
he was trembling. Drawing his eyes  down from the tower and the horns of the 
Cleft  before  him, he forced  his unwilling  feet  to obey him, and slowly, 
listening  with all  his  ears, peering into the dense shadows of  the rocks 
beside the way, he  retraced his steps, past the place where Frodo fell, and 
still the  stench of Shelob lingered,  and  then  on  and up, until he stood 
again in the very  cleft where  he had  put  on the Ring  and seen Shagrat's 
company go by. 
     There he halted and sat down. For the moment he could drive himself  no 
further. He  felt that if once he went beyond the crown of the pass and took  
one  step  veritably  down  into the land  of  Mordor, that  step  would  be 
irrevocable. He could never come back. Without a ny clear purpose he drew out 
the  Ring  and put it  on again. Immediately he felt the great burden of its 
weight, and  felt afresh,  but  now more  strong  and urgent than ever,  the 

####-malice of the Eye of Mordor, searching, trying to pierce the shadows that it 
had made for its own defence, but which now  hindered it in its  unquiet and 
doubt. 
     As before, Sam found  that his  hearing was sharpened, but  that to his 
sight the things of this world seemed thin and vague. The rocky walls of the 
path were pale , as if seen through  a mist, but still at a distance he heard 
the bubbling of Shelob in her misery: and harsh and clear, and very close it 
seemed, he  heard cries  and the clash of metal. He sprang to his  feet, and 
pressed himself against the wall beside  the road. He was glad of the  Ring, 
for here was  yet another company of orcs on  the  march. Or so  at first he 
thought.  Then suddenly  he realized that  it  was not so,  his  hearing had 
deceived him: the orc-cries came from the tower, whose topmost  horn was 
now 
right above him, on the left hand of the Cleft. 
     Sam shuddered and tried  to force  himself to  move.  There was plainly 
some devilry going on. Perhaps in spite of all  orders  the  cruelty of  the 
orcs  had mastered them, and  they were tormenting Frodo,  or  even savagely 
hacking  him  to pieces. He listened; and as he did  a gleam of hope came to  
him. There could  not  be much  doubt: there was fighting in  the tower, the 
orcs  must be at war among themselves, Shagrat and Gorbag had come to 
blows. 
Faint as was the  hope that his  guess brought him, it  was enough to  rouse 
him.  There might be just a  chance. His love for Frodo rose above all other  
thoughts, and forgetting his peril he cried aloud: 'I'm coming, Mr. Frodo!' 
     He ran  forward to  the  climbing path, and  over it.  At once the road 
turned left and plunged steeply down. Sam had crossed into Mordor. 
 
     He took off  the  Ring, moved  it may be  by some  deep premonition  of 
danger,  though  to  himself he  thought  only that  he wished  to see  more 
clearly. `Better have a look at the worst,' he muttered. `No good blundering 
about in a fog!' 
     Hard and cruel and bitter  was the land  that met his gaze.  Before his 
feet the highest ridge  of the Ephel D®ath fell steeply in great cliffs down 
into a  dark trough, on the further side  of which there rose another ridge, 
much lower, its edge notched and jagged with crags like fangs that stood out 
black  against the red light  behind them: it was the grim Morgai, the inner  
ring of the fences  of  the land. Far  beyond it, but almost straight ahead, 

####-across a wide  lake  of darkness dotted  with  tiny fires, there was a great 
burning glow; and from it rose  in huge columns a swirling smoke,  dusty red 
at the  roots, black above  where it merged into the  billowing canopy  that 
roofed in all the accursed land. 
     Sam was looking  at Orodruin,  the Mountain of  Fire. Ever and anon the  
furnaces far  below  its ashen  cone would grow hot and with a great surging 
and  throbbing pour  forth rivers of  molten rock from chasms  in its sides.  
Some would  flow blazing towards  Barad-dyr down  great channels; some 
would 
wind their way into the  stony plain, until they cooled and lay like twisted 
dragon-shapes vomited from  the tormented earth .  In such an hour of  labour 
Sam beheld  Mount Doom, and the light  of it, cut off by the high  screen of 
the Ephel D®ath from those who climbed up the path from the West, now 
glared 
against the stark rock faces, so that they seemed to be drenched with blood. 
     In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast, for now, looking to his  left, 
he could see the Tower of Cirith Ungol in all its strength. The horn that he 
had  seen from the other side was only its topmost turret. Its  eastern face 
stood up  in three great tiers from a shelf in the mountain-wall far  below; 
its back was to a  great  cliff behind, from which it  jutted out in pointed 
bastions, one above the other, diminishing as they rose, with sheer sides of 
cunning  masonry  that looked north-east  and   south-east. About the  lowest  
tier, two hundred feet below where Sam now  stood, there was a  battlemented 
wall  enclosing a narrow court.  Its gate, upon the near south-eastern side, 
opened  on a broad road,  the outer parapet of which ran upon the brink of a  
precipice, until it turned southward and went winding down into the darkness 
to  join the road that came  over the Morgul Pass. Then on it went through a  
jagged  rift in the  Morgai  out  into the  valley of Gorgoroth  and away to 
Barad-dyr.  The  narrow upper way on which  Sam stood leapt  swiftly down 
by 
stair and steep path to meet the main road under the frowning walls close to  
the Tower -gate. 
     As he gazed at it  suddenly Sam understood, almost  with a shock,  that 
this stronghold had been  built  not to  keep enemies out of  Mordor, but to 
keep them in. It was indeed one  of the works of Gondor long ago, an eastern 
outpost of the defences of Ithilien, made when, after the Last Alliance, Men  
of  Westernesse kept  watch on  the evil land of  Sauron where his creatures 

####-still lurked. But as with Narchost and Carchost, the Towers of the Teeth, so 
here too the vigilance had failed, and treachery had yielded up the Tower to  
the Lord of the Ringwraiths, and now for long years it had been held by evil  
things. Since his return to Mordor, Sauron had found  it useful; for he  had 
few servants but many slaves of fear, and still its chief  purpose as of old 
was to prevent escape from Mordor. Though if an enemy were so rash as to try 
to  enter that  land  secretly, then it  was also  a  last  unsleeping guard 
against any that might pass the vigilance of Morgul and of Shelob. 
     Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for him to creep down 
under those many-eyed  walls and pass the watchful gate. And  even  if he did 
so, he  could not go  far  on  the guarded road beyond:  not even  the black  
shadows,  lying  deep where  the red glow could not reach, would shield  him 
long from the night-eyed orcs. But desperate as that road might be, his task  
was now  far worse: not to avoid the gate and escape, but to enter it, alone. 
 
     His  thought turned to the Ring, but there was  no  comfort there, only 
dread and danger. No  sooner had he come in sight of Mount Doom, burning 
far 
away, than he was aware of a cha nge in his burden. As it drew near the great 
furnaces  where,  in the deeps of time, it had been shaped  and forged,  the 
Ring's power grew, and  it became more fell, untameable  save by some mighty 
will. As Sam stood there, even though the Ring was not on  him but hanging by 
its chain about his neck, he felt himself enlarged, as if he were robed in a  
huge distorted shadow of  himself, a vast and ominous threat halted upon the 
walls of  Mordor. He  felt  that he had  from now on  only two  choices:  to 
forbear the Ring, though it would torment him; or to claim it, and challenge 
the Power that sat in  its dark hold beyond the valley  of  shadows. Already 
the Ring tempted him, gnawing at his will and  reason.  Wild fantasies arose 
in his mind; and he saw Samwise the Strong, Hero of the Age, striding with a 
flaming sword across the darkened land, and armies flocking  to  his call as 
he  marched to the  overthrow of  Barad-dyr. And then all the  clouds rolled 
away,  and the white sun  shone, and  at his command the  vale of  Gorgoroth 
became a garden of flowers and trees and brought forth fruit. He had only to 
put on the Ring and claim it for his own, and all this could be. 
     In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to 
hold  him firm; but also deep  down in him lived still unconquered his plain 
hobbit-sense: he  knew in the core of his heart that he was not large enough 

####-to bear such a burden, even  if such visions were not a mere cheat to betray 
him. The one small garden of a free gardener was all his need and due, not a  
garden swollen to a realm; his own hands to  use, not the hands of others to 
command. 
     'And  anyway all these notions  are only a trick,' he said  to himself. 
'He'd spot me and cow me, before I could so much as shou t out. He'd spot me, 
pretty  quick, if I put the Ring  on now, in Mordor. Well, all I can say is:  
things look  as hopeless  as  a frost in spring.  Just when being  invisible 
would be really useful, I can't use the Ring! And if ever I get any further, 
it's going to be nothing but a drag and a burden every step. So what's to be 
done?' 
     He was not  really  in any doubt. He knew  that he must go  down to the 
gate and not linger any more. With a shrug of his shoulders,  as if to shake 
off the shadow and dismiss  the phantoms, he began  slowly  to descend. With 
each  step he seemed to  diminish. He had not gone far  before he had shrunk 
again to a  very small and  frightened hobbit. He was now  passing under the  
very walls of the Tower, and the cries and sounds of fighting could be heard 
with his unaided ears. At the moment the  noise seemed to be coming from the 
court behind the outer wall. 
 
     Sam was about half way down the path when out of the dark gateway  into 
the red  glow there  came two orcs running . They  did not turn towards  him. 
They were  making for the main road; but  even as they ran they stumbled and 
fell  to the ground  and lay still.  Sam had seen no  arrows, but he guessed 
that the orcs had  been shot down by others on  the battlements or hidden in 
the shadow of the gate. He  went on, hugging  the wall on his left. One look  
upward had  shown him that there was no hope of  climbing it. The stone-work 
rose  thirty  feet, without  a crack  or ledge, to  overhanging courses like 
inverted steps. The gate was the only way. 
     He crept on;  and  as he went  he wondered how many  orcs lived  in the 
Tower with Shagrat, and how many Gorbag had, and what they  were 
quarrelling 
about, if  that was  what was  happening. Shagrat's company had seemed to be 
about forty, and  Gorbag's more than twice as large; but of course Shagrat's 
patrol  had  only been a part of his  garrison. Almost  certainly  they were 
quarrelling  about  Frodo,  and the  spoil.  For  a second  Sam  halted, for 
suddenly things seemed clear to him, almost as if he had seen them with  his 

####-eyes. The mithril coat! Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and they would find 
it. And from what Sam had heard Gorbag would covet it. But the orders of the 
Dark  Tower  were at present Frodo's  only  protection, and if they were set 
aside, Frodo might be killed out of hand at any moment. 
     'Come on, you miserable sluggard!' Sam cried to  himself. `Now for it!' 
He drew Sting and ran towards the  open gate. But  just as he was  about  to 
pass under its great arch he felt a  shock: as if  he had run into some  web 
like Shelob's, only invisible. He could see no obstacle,  but  something too 
strong for his will to  overcome barred  the way. He  looked about, and then  
within the shadow of the gate he saw the Two Watchers. 
     They were like great figures seated upon thrones. Each had three joined 
bodies,  and three heads facing outward, and inward, and across the gateway. 
The  heads had vulture-faces, and on  their  great knees were  laid clawlike 
hands. They seemed to be carved out of huge blocks  of stone, immovable, and 
yet they were aware: some dreadful  spirit of evil vigilance  abode in them. 
They knew  an  enemy.  Visible or  invisible none  could pass unheeded. They 
would forbid his entry, or his escape. 
     Hardening his  will  Sam thrust forward once again, and  halted  with a  
jerk, staggering  as if from a blow  upon his  breast and head. Then greatly 
daring, because he could  think  of nothing  else to do, answering  a sudden 
thought that came to him, he drew slowly out the phial of Galadriel and held 
it up.  Its white light quickened swiftly, and  the shadows under  the  dark 
arch fled. The monstrous Watchers sat there cold and still, revealed  in all 
their hideous shape. For a moment  Sam caught a  glitter in  the black stones  
of their  eyes, the very malice of which made  him quail; but slowly he felt 
their will waver and crumble into fear. 
     He sprang past them; but even as he  did so, thrusting the  phial  back  
into his bosom, he was aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had snapped to 
behind  him,  that their vigilance was  renewed. And  from  those evil heads 
there came  a high shrill cry that echoed  in the towering walls before him. 
Far up above,  like  an answering signal,  a  harsh bell  clanged  a  single 
stroke. 
 
     'That's done it!'  said Sam. `Now I've rung  the front-door bell! Well, 
come   on  somebody!'  he  cried.  `Tell  Captain  Shagrat  that  the  great 
Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too!' 
     There  was no answer. Sam  strode forward. Sting glittered  blue in his 

####-hand. The courtyard lay in  deep shadow, but he could see that  the pavement 
was strewn with bodies. Right at his feet were  two  orc-archers with knives 
sticking  in their backs. Beyond lay many  more shapes;  some singly as they 
had been hewn  down or shot;  others in pairs, still  grappling one another, 
dead  in  the very  throes  of stabbing, throttling, biting. The stones were 
slippery with dark blood. 
     Two liveries Sam noticed, one  marked  by the  Red  Eye, the other by a  
Moon disfigured with a ghastly  face of death;  but he did not  stop to look  
more closely.  Across the court a  great door at the foot of the Tower stood 
half  open,  and a red light came through; a large  orc  lay dead  upon  the 
threshold. Sam sprang over the body and went in; and then he peered about at 
a loss. 
     A  wide  and  echoing  passage led  back  from  the  door  towards  the 
mountain-side. It  was  dimly  lit with torches flaring  in  brackets on the 
walls, but its distant end was lost in gloom. Many doors  and openings could 
be seen on this  side and  that; but it was empty save for two or three more 
bodies sprawling on the  floor. From what he had heard of the captains' talk  
Sam knew that, dead  or alive, Frodo would most likely be found in a chamber  
high up  in the turret far above; but he  might search for  a day  before he 
found the way. 
     'It'll  be near  the back, I  guess,' Sam  muttered.  `The  whole Tower  
climbs backwards-like. And anyway I'd better follow these lights.' 
     He advanced down the passage, but slowly now, each step more reluctant. 
Terror  was beginning to grip him again. There was no sound save the  rap of 
his feet, which seemed to  grow to  an echoing noise,  like  the slapping of 
great hands upon  the stones. The dead bodies: the emptiness; the dank black 
walls  that in the torchlight seemed to drip with blood; the  fear of sudden 
death lurking in doorway or  shadow;  and behind all  his mind  the  waiting  
watchful malice at the gate: it  was almost more than he could  screw himself 
to  face. He would have welcomed a fight-with not too many enemies at a time 
- rather than this hideous brooding uncertainty. He forced himself to  think  
of Frodo,  lying bound or  in pain or dead somewhere in this dreadful place.  
He went on. 
     He had passed  beyond  the torchlight, almost to a great arched door at 
the end  of  the passage, the inner side of  the under gate, as  he  rightly 
guessed,  when  there  came  from high above a dreadful  choking shriek.  He 
stopped short. Then he heard feet coming. Someone was running in great haste 

####-down an echoing stairway overhead. 
     His  will was too weak and slow to restrain his hand. It dragged at the 
chain and  clutched  the Ring. But Sam did  not put  it  on; for even as  he 
clasped it to his breast, an orc came clattering down. Leaping out of a dark 
opening at the right, it ran towards him. It was no more than six paces from 
him  when,  lifting its head, it  saw him;  and  Sam  could hear its gasping 
breath and see the glare in its bloodshot eyes. It stopped short aghast. For  
what it saw was not a small frightened hobbit trying to hold a steady sword:  
it saw a great silent shape, cloaked in  a grey shadow, looming against  the 
wavering light behind; in one hand it held a sword, the very  light of which 
was a bitter pain, the other was clutched  at its breast, but held concealed 
some nameless menace of power and doom. 
     For a moment the orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp  of fear it 
turned and fled back as it had come. Never  was  any dog more heartened when 
its  enemy turned  tail  than Sam at this unexpected flight. With a shout he 
gave chase. 
     `Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose!'  he  cried. 'I'm coming. Just you show 
me the way up, or I'll skin you! ' 
     But  the orc  was  in its own haunts,  nimble  and  well -fed. Sam was a  
stranger, hungry and weary.  The stairs  were  high  and  steep and winding.  
Sam's breath began to come in gasps. The orc had soon passed  out  of sight,  
and now only faintly   could be  heard the slapping of its feet as it went on 
and  up. Every now  and again it gave  a yell, and  the  echo  ran along the 
walls. But slowly all sound of it died away. 
     Sam plodded on.  He felt that he was on the right road, and his spirits 
had risen a  good  deal.  He thrust  the Ring away  and tightened his  belt. 
`Well, well!'  he said. `If only  they all take such a  dislike to me and my 
Sting, this  may  turn out  better than  I hoped. And anyway it looks  as if 
Shagrat, Gorbag, and company  have done nearly all my job for me. Except for  
that little frightened rat, I do believe  there's  nobody left alive  in the 
place!' 
     And with  that  he stopped, brought up  hard, as if he had hit his head 
against the stone wall. The full meaning of what he had said struck him like 
a  blow. Nobody  left alive!  Whose had  been that  horrible  dying  shriek? 
`Frodo, Frodo! Master!' he cried half sobbing. 'If they've killed you,  what 
shall I do? Well, I'm coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.' 
 

####-     Up, up he went. It was dark save  for an occasional torch  flaring at a  
turn, or beside some opening  that  led into the higher levels of the Tower. 
Sam tried to count the  steps, but  after two hundred he lost his reckoning. 
He  was moving quietly  now: for  he thought that he could hear the sound of 
voices talking, still  some way above. More than  one rat remained alive, it 
seemed. 
     All  at  once, when he felt that he could pump out no more  breath, nor  
force  his knees to bend again, the stair ended. He stood still. The  voices 
were  now loud and near. Sam  peered about. He had climbed right to the flat 
roof of the third and highest tier of the Tower: an open space, about twenty 
yards across, with  a low parapet. There the  stair was covered by  a  small 
domed chamber in the midst of the roof, with low doors facing east and west. 
Eastward Sam  could  see the plain  of Mordor vast  and  dark below, and the 
burning mountain  far away. A  fresh turmoil was surging in its  deep wells,  
and the rivers of fire blazed so fiercely that even at this distance of many 
miles the light  of them  lit the tower -top with a red glare.  Westward  the 
view was blocked  by the base of the great turret that stood at the  back of 
this upper court and reared its  horn high above the crest of the encircling 
hills. Light gleamed in a window-slit. Its door was not ten yards from where 
Sam stood. It  was open but dark, and from just within its shadow the voices 
came. 
     At first Sam did not listen; he took a pace  out  of the  eastward door  
and  looked  about.  At  once he saw  that up  here the  fighting  had  been 
fiercest. All the  court was  choked with  dead orcs  or their  severed  and 
scattered heads  and limbs. The place stank of death. A snarl  followed by  a 
blow  and  a  cry  sent him darting back into hiding. An  orc-voice rose  in 
anger,  and he knew  it again  at once, harsh, brutal, cold. It was  Shagrat 
speaking, Captain of the Tower. 
     `You won't  go again,  you say? Curse you, Snaga, you little maggot! If 
you think  I'm so damaged  that it's safe  to flout me, you're mistaken Come 
here, and I'll  squeeze  your  eyes out, like I did to Radbug just now.  And 
when some new lads come, I'll deal with you: I'll send you to Shelob.' 
     `They  won't  come,  not before  you're dead  anyway,'  answered  Snaga  
surlily. 'I've told you twice that Gorbag's swine got to the gate first, and 
none of ours  got out. Lagduf and Muzgash ran through, but they were shot. I 
saw it from a window, I tell you. And they wer e the last.' 
     'Then you  must go. I must stay here anyway. But  I'm  hurt.  The Black  

####-Pits take  that filthy  rebel  Gorbag!' Shagrat's  voice trailed off into  a  
string of foul  names and curses. `I  gave  him  better  than  I got, but he 
knifed me, the dung,  before I throttled him. You must go, or  I'll eat you. 
News must  get through to Lugb®rz, or we'll both be for the Black Pits. Yes, 
you too. You won't escape by skulking here.' 
     `I'm not going down those stairs again,' growled Snaga, `be you captain 
or no. Nar! Keep your hands off your knife,  or I'll  put  an arrow  in your 
guts. You won't be a captain  long when They hear about all these goings-on. 
I've  fought for the  Tower against those  stinking Morgul-rats,  but a nice 
mess you two precious captains have made of things, fighting over the swag.' 
     'That's enough  from you,'  snarled  Shagrat. `I had my orders. It  was 
Gorbag started it, trying to pinch that pretty shirt.' 
     `Well, you put  his back up, being so high and mighty. And he had  more 
sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the most dangerous of 
these spies was still loose, and you wouldn't  listen. And you  won't listen 
now. Gorbag  was right, I tell you. There's  a great fighter  about,  one of 
those bloody-handed  Elves, or one of the filthy tarks.1 He's coming here, I 
tell you. You heard the bell.  He's got past the Watchers, and that's tark's 
work.  He's on the stairs. And until he's off them, I'm not going  down. Not 
if you were a Nazgyl, I wouldn't.' 
     `So  that's it, is it?' yelled Shagrat. 'You'll do this, and you'll not 
do  that? And  when he does come, you'll bolt  and leave me? No, you  won't! 
I'll put red maggot-holes in your belly first.' 
     Out of the turret-door the  smaller  orc came flying.  Behind  him came 
Shagrat, a large orc with long  arms that,  as  he ran crouching, reached to 
the  ground. But one  arm hung  limp and seemed to be  bleeding;  the  other  
hugged  a  large black bundle.  In the red  glare  Sam, cowering behind  the 
stair-door, caught a glimpse of his evil face as it passed: it was scored as 
if  by  rending  claws and  smeared  with blood;  slaver  dripped  from  its 
protruding fangs; the mouth snarled like an animal. 
     As far as Sam could see, Shagrat  hunted  Snaga round  the roof,  until 
ducking and eluding  him the  smaller  orc with a yelp darted back  into the 
turret  and  disappeared. Then  Shagrat halted. Out of the eastward door Sam 
could see  him now  by the parapet, panting,  his  left claw  clenching  and 
unclenching feebly. He put  the bundle on the floor and with  his right claw 
drew out a long red knife and spat on it.  Going to  the  parapet he  leaned 
over, looking down into  the outer court far below.  Twice he shouted but no 

####-answer came. 
     Suddenly,  as Shagrat was stooped over the battlement, his back to  the 
roof-top, Sam to  his amazement  saw  that one  of the  sprawling bodies was 
moving. It  was  crawling. It  put out  a  claw and clutched the  bundle. It 
staggered up. In its  other hand it  held a broad-headed spear  with a short 
broken haft. It was poised for a stabbing thrust. But at that  very moment a  
hiss  escaped  its teeth, a gasp of  pain or hate. Quick as a snake  Shagrat 
slipped aside, twisted round, and drove his knife into his enemy 's throat. 
     `Got you, Gorbag!' he cried. 'Not quite dead, eh? Well, I'll finish  my 
job now.' He sprang on to the  fallen  body, and stamped and trampled it  in 
his  fury, stooping  now and  again to  stab and  slash  it with his  knife. 
Satisfied  at last, he threw back  his head and let out a  horrible gurgling 
yell of triumph. Then he licked his knife, and put it between his teeth, and 
catching up the bundle he came loping towards the near door of the stairs.  
     Sam had no time  to think. He might have slipped out of the other door, 
but  hardly without  being seen;  and he could not have played hide-and-seek 
with this  hideous  orc for long. He did what was probably the best thing he 
could have  done.  He sprang  out to  meet  Shagrat with a shout. He was  no 
longer holding the Ring, but it was there, a hidden power, a  cowing  menace 
to the slaves of Mordor; and in his hand was Sting, and its  light smote the 
eyes  of  the   orc  like  the  glitter  of  cruel  stars  in  the  terrible 
elf-countries,  the  dream  of which was a  cold fear to all  his  kind.  And 
Shagrat could not  both fight and  keep hold  of his treasure.  He  stopped, 
growling, baring his fangs. Then once more, orc-fashion, he leapt aside, and 
as Sam  sprang at  him, using the heavy bundle as both shield and weapon, he 
thrust it  hard into his  enemy's face. Sam staggered, and before  he  could 
recover, Shagrat darted past and down the stairs.  
     Sam ran after him, cursing, but he did not go far.  Soon the thought of 
Frodo returned  to him, and he remembered that the other  orc  had gone back 
into the turret. Here was another  dreadful  choice, and he  had  no time to 
ponder it. If Shagrat got away, he would soon get help and come back. But if 
Sam  pursued him,  the  other orc might  do some horrible deed up there. And 
anyway Sam might miss Shagrat or be killed by him. He turned quickly and ran 
back up the  stairs. `Wrong again, I expect,' he sighed. `But it's my job to 
go right up to the top first, whatever happens afterwards.' 
     Away below Shagrat went leaping  down the stairs and out over the court 
and  through the gate,  bearing his precious burden. If Sam could have  seen 

####-him and known the grief that  his escape would bring, he might have quailed. 
But now his mind was set on the last stage of his search. He came cautiously  
to the turret-door and stepped inside. It opened into darkness. But soon his 
staring  eyes were aware of a dim light at  his right hand. It came  from an 
opening that led  to another stairway,  dark  and narrow: it appeared  to go 
winding up the turret along the inside of its round outer wall. A  torch was 
glimmering from somewhere up above. 
     Softly Sam began to climb. He came  to the guttering torch, fixed above 
a door on his left that faced a window-slit looking out westward: one of the 
red eyes that he and Frodo  had  seen from down below by the tunnel's mouth. 
Quickly Sam passed the door and hurried on to the second storey, dreading at 
any  moment to he  attacked and to feel throttling fingers seize  his throat 
from behind. He came  next to a window looking east and another torch  above 
the door to a passage through the middle  of the turret. The door  was open, 
the passage  dark  save for the glimmer of  the torch and the red glare from 
outside filtering through  the window-slit.  But here  the stair stopped and 
climbed  no further. Sam crept into the passage.  On either side there was a  
low door; both were closed and locked. There was no sound at all. 
     `A dead end,'  muttered Sam; `and after all my climb! This can't be the  
top of the tower. But what can I do now?' 
     He ran back to the lower  storey and tried the door. It would not move. 
He ran up again, and sweat began to trickle down his face. He felt that even 
minutes were precious, but one by one they escaped; and he could do nothing. 
He  cared  no  longer for Shagrat or Snaga  or any  other orc that  was ever 
spawned. He longed  only for his master,  for one  sight of his face  or one 
touch of his hand. 
     At last, weary and feeling finally defeated, he sat on a step below the 
level of the passage-floor and bowed his head into his hands. It  was quiet, 
horribly quiet.  The torch,  that was already burning  low  when he arrived, 
sputtered and went out; and he felt the darkness cover him like a tide.  And 
then softly, to his own  surprise, there at the vain end of his long journey 
and his  grief, moved by what thought in his  heart he could  not  tell, Sam 
began to sing. 
     His voice sounded thin and  quavering in the cold dark tower: the voice 
of a forlorn and  weary hobbit  that no listening orc could possibly mistake 
for the  clear song of an Elven-lord. He murmured  old childish tunes out of 
the Shire, and snatches of Mr.  Bilbo's  rhymes that came into his mind like 

####-fleeting glimpses of the country of his home. And then suddenly new strength 
rose in him, and his voice rang out, while words of his own came unbidden to 
fit the simple tune. 
     In western lands beneath the Sun  
     the flowers may rise in Spring, 
     the trees may bud, the wa ters run, 
     the merry finches sing. 
     Or there maybe 'tis cloudless night 
     and swaying beeches bear 
     the Elven-stars as jewels white  
     amid their branching hair. 
 
     Though here at journey's end I lie  
     in darkness buried deep, 
     beyond all towers strong and high, 
     beyond all mountains steep, 
     above all shadows rides the Sun 
     and Stars for ever dwell: 
     I will not say the Day is done, 
     nor bid the Stars farewell. 
     `Beyond  all towers strong  and high,'  he began  again,  and  then  he 
stopped short. He thought that he had heard a faint voice answering him. But 
now he could  hear nothing. Yes, he  could hear something,  but not a voice.  
Footsteps were  approaching.  Now  a  door was being opened  quietly in  the 
passage above; the hinges  creaked. Sam crouched  down  listening.  The door  
closed with a dull thud; and then a snarling orc-voice rang out. 
     'Ho la! You up  there, you dunghill rat! Stop your  squeaking,  or I'll 
come and deal with you. D'you hear?' 
     There was no answer. 
     'All right,' growled Snaga.  `But I'll come and  have a look at you all 
the same, and see what you're up to.' 
     The hinges creaked again, and Sam, now  peering over  the corner of the 
passage-threshold, saw a flicker  of light in an open doorway, and  the  dim 
shape of an orc  coming out. He seemed to be carrying a ladder. Suddenly the 
answer dawned on Sam: the topmost chamber was reached  by a trap-door in 
the 
roof of the passage. Snaga thrust the ladder  upwards, steadied it, and then 

####-clambered  out  of  sight. Sam heard  a bolt drawn back.  Then he  heard the 
hideous voice speaking again. 
     `You  lie quiet, or  you'll pay for it! You've not got long to live  in 
peace, I guess; but if you don't want the fun to begin right now, keep  your 
trap shut, see? There's a reminder  for you!'  There was  a sound  like  the 
crack of a whip. 
     At that rage blazed in Sam's heart to a sudden fury. He sprang up, ran, 
and went up  the ladder  like a cat. His head came out in the middle of  the 
floor of a large  round chamber. A red lamp hung from its roof; the westward 
window-slit was high and dark. Something  was lying on the floor by the wall 
under the window,  but over it a black  orc-shape was straddled. It raised a  
whip a second time, but the blow never fell. 
     With a cry Sam  leapt across  the floor, Sting in hand. The orc wheeled 
round, but before it could make a move Sam slashed  its  whip-hand  from its 
arm.  Howling with pain and fear but desperate the orc charged head-down  at 
him.  Sam's  next  blow  went wide,  and  thrown  off  his balance  he  fell 
backwards, clutching at  the  orc as it  stumbled over him.  Before he could 
scramble up he heard a cry and a thud. The orc in its wild haste had tripped 
on the ladder -head  and  fallen through the open trap-door. Sam gave no more 
thought to it. He ran to the figure huddled on the floor. It was Frodo. 
 
     He was  naked, lying as if in a swoon on a heap of filthy rags: his arm 
was  flung up,  shielding his head,  and  across his side there ran an  ugly 
whip-weal. 
     `Frodo! Mr. Frodo,  my dear!'  cried Sam,  tears  almost  blinding him. 
`It's Sam, I've come!' He  half  lifted  his  master and hugged  him to  his 
breast. Frodo opened his eyes. 
     `Am  I  still  dreaming?'  he  muttered.  `But  the other  dreams  were 
horrible.' 
     `You're not dreaming at all, Master,'  said  Sam. `It's real. It's  me. 
I've come.' 
     `I can hardly believe it,' said Frodo, clutching him. `There was an orc 
with a whip, and then  it  turns into Sam! Then I wasn't  dreaming after all 
when I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer? Was it you?' 
     'It was indeed, Mr.  Frodo. I'd given up  hope, almost. I couldn't find 
you. 
     Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam, said Frodo, and he la back  in Sam's 

####-gentle arms,  closing his eyes, like  a child at rest  when night-fears  are 
driven away by some loved voice or hand. 
     Sam  felt that he  could sit like that in endless happiness; but it was 
not allowed. It was not  enough for him to find his master, he  had still to 
try and save him. He kissed Frodo's forehead. `Come!  Wake up Mr. Frodo!' he 
said, trying to sound as cheerful  as he had when  he drew back the curtains 
at Bag End on a summer's morning. 
     Frodo sighed and sat up. `Where are we? How did I get here?' he asked. 
     'There's no time for tales till we get somewhere else, Mr. Frodo,' said 
Sam. `But you're in the top of that tower you and me saw from away  down  by 
the tunnel before the orcs got you. How long ago that wa s I don't know. More 
than a day, I guess.' 
     `Only that?' said  Frodo. `It seems weeks. You  must  tell me all about 
it,  if  we get  a  chance. Something  hit me, didn't  it?  And I fell  into 
darkness and foul dreams,  and  woke and found that  waking was worse.  Orcs 
were all round me. I think they had just been  pouring some horrible burning  
drink  down my throat. My head grew clear, but I was  aching and weary. They 
stripped me of everything; and then two great brutes came and questioned me, 
questioned  me until I thought I should go mad, standing  over me, gloating,  
fingering their knives. I'll never forget their claws and eyes.' 
     `You won't,  if you talk about them, Mr.  Frodo,' said Sam.  'And if we 
don't want to see them  again, the sooner we   get going  the better. Can you  
walk?' 
     `Yes,  I can walk,' said Frodo, getting up slowly. 'I am not hurt  Sam. 
Only  I feel very tired, and I've a pain here.' He put  his hand to the back  
of his neck above his left shoulder. He stood up, and it looked to Sam as if 
he was clothed in flame: his naked skin was scarlet in the light of the lamp 
above. Twice he paced across the floor. 
     `That's better!' he said,  his spirits rising a  little. `I didn't dare 
to move when I was left alone, or  one of the guards came. Until the yelling 
and fighting began. The two big  brutes:  they quarrelled, I think. Over  me 
and my  things. I lay  here  terrified. And then all  went deadly quiet, and 
that was worse.' 
     `Yes, they  quarrelled, seemingly,'  said Sam. (There must  have been a  
couple  of  hundred of the dirty creatures  in  this place.  A bit of a tall 
order for Sam Gamgee, as  you might say. But they've done all the killing of 
themselves. That's lucky, but it's too long to make a song about, till we're 

####-out of  here. Now what's to be done? You can't go walking  in the Black Land 
in naught but your skin, Mr. Frodo.' 
     `They've  taken everything, Sam,' said Frodo. `Everything I had. Do you  
understand?  Everything!'  He cowered on the floor again with bowed head, as 
his own words brought home to  him the fullness of the disaster, and despair  
overwhelmed him.  'The quest  has failed Sam. Even if we get out of here, we 
can't escape. Only  Elves  can escape. Away,  away out  of Middle-earth, far  
away over the Sea. If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.' 
     `No,  not everything, Mr. Frodo. And it  hasn't failed, not yet. I took  
it, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon.  And I've kept  it safe.  It's round  my 
neck  now, and a terrible  burden it is, too.'  Sam fumbled for the Ring and 
its chain. `But I suppose you must take it back.' Now it had come to it, Sam 
felt reluctant to give up the Ring and burden his master with it again. 
     `You've  got it?' gasped  Frodo. `You've  got  it  here? Sam, you're  a  
marvel!'  Then quickly and strangely his tone changed. `Give it to  me!'  he 
cried, standing up, holding out  a trembling hand. `Give it  me at once! You  
can't have it!' 
     'All right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rather startled. 'Here it is!' Slowly 
he drew the Ring out and passed the chain over his head.  `But you're in the 
land of Mordor now, sir; and when you get out, you'll see the Fiery Mountain 
and all. You'll find the Ring very dangerous now, and very hard to bear.  If 
it's too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?' 
     `No, no!'  cried Frodo, snatching the  Ring and chain from Sam's hands.  
`No you won't,  you thief!'  He panted, staring at Sam  with eyes wide  with 
fear and enmity. Then  suddenly, clasping the Ring in one clenched  fist, he 
stood aghast. A mist seemed  to  clear from his eyes, and  he passed a  hand 
over  his  aching brow. The hideous vision had  seemed so real to  him, half 
bemused as he was still with wound and fear. Sam had changed before his very 
eyes  into an orc again, leering and pawing  at his  treasure, a foul little 
creature with  greedy  eyes  and  slobbering  mouth. But  now the vision had 
passed.  There was Sam kneeling before him, his face wrung with pain,  as if 
he had been stabbed in the heart; tears welled from his eyes. 
     'O Sam!' cried Frodo. `What have I said? What have I done? Forgive  me! 
After all you have done. It is the horrible power of the Ring. I wish it had 
never, never, been found. But don't mind me, Sam. I must carry the burden to 
the end. It can't be altered. You can't come between me and this doom.' 
     'That's all right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rubbing  his sleeve across his 

####-eyes. `I understand. But I can still help, can't I? I've got to get  you out 
of  here. At  once, see! But first you want  some clothes  and gear and then 
some food.  The clothes will be the  easiest part. As we're in Mordor, we'd, 
best  dress up Mordor -fashion;  and anyway there isn't no choice. It'll have 
to  be orc-stuff  for you, Mr.  Frodo,  I'm afraid. And for me too. If we go 
together, we'd best match. Now put this round you!' 
     Sam unclasped his grey cloak and cast it about Frodo's  shoulders. Then 
unslinging his pack he laid  it on the floor. He drew Sting from its sheath. 
Hardly a flicker was to be seen upon  its blade. `I was forgetting this, Mr. 
Frodo,' he said.  `No, they didn't get everything! You lent me Sting, if you  
remember, and the Lady's glass. I've  got them both still. But  lend them to 
me a little longer, Mr. Frodo. I must go  and see what  I can find. You stay 
here. Walk about a bit and ease your legs. I shan't be long.  I shan't  have 
to go far.' 
     `Take  care,  Sam!'  said Frodo. `And be quick! There may be orcs still 
alive, lurking in wait.' 
     'I've  got to chance  it,' said  Sam. He  stepped to the  trap-door and 
slipped down the ladder. In a  minute  his head reappeared. He threw  a long 
knife on the floor. 
     `There's something that might be  useful,' he said. 'He's dead: the one 
that  whipped  you. Broke his neck, it seems, in his hurry. Now you draw  up 
the ladder, if  you can, Mr. Frodo;  and don't you let it down till you hear 
me call the password. Elbereth   I'll call. What  the Elves say. No orc would 
say that.' 
 
     Frodo sat  for a while and shivered, dreadful fears chasing one another 
through his mind. Then he  got up, drew the grey elven-cloak about him,  and 
to keep his mind occupied, began to walk to and fro, prying and peering into 
every corner of his prison. 
     It was not very long, though fear made it seem an hour at least, before 
he  heard Sam's voice calling softly from  below:  Elbereth, Elbereth . Frodo 
let  down the light ladder. Up  came Sam, puffing, heaving a great bundle on  
his head. He let it fall with a thud. 
     `Quick now. Mr.  Frodo!' he said. `I've had a  bit of  a search to find 
anything  small enough for the likes of us.  We'll have  to make do.  But we 
must hurry. I've met nothing alive, and  I've seen nothing but I'm not easy. 
I think this place is being watched. I can't explain it, but well: it  feels 

####-to me as  if  one of those foul flying Riders was about, up in the blackness 
where he can't be seen.' 
     He opened  the  bundle. Frodo  looked in  disgust at  the contents, but 
there was nothing for it: he had to put the  things on, or go  naked.  There 
were  long hairy breeches of some unclean beast -fell,  and a  tunic of dirty 
leather. He  drew them on. Over the  tunic  went a coat  of stout ring-mail, 
short for  a  full-sized  orc,  too long for  Frodo  and heavy. About it  he 
clasped  a belt, at which there hung a  short  sheath holding a broad-bladed 
stabbing-sword.  Sam  had brought  several  orc-helmets. One of  them fitted  
Frodo well enough, a black  cap with iron rim, and  iron  hoops covered with 
leather  upon  which  the  evil  Eye was  painted  in red above the beaklike 
nose-guard. 
     `The Morgul-stuff,  Gorbag's gear,  was  a better fit and better made,' 
said Sam;  `but it  wouldn't do,  I  guess, to go  carrying his  tokens into 
Mordor,  not  after  this  business here. Well,  there you are, Mr. Frodo. A 
perfect little orc, if I may make so bold-at least you would be, if we could 
cover your face with a mask,  give you longer arms, and make you bow-legged. 
This  will  hide some of the tell-tales.' He put a large  black cloak  round 
Frodo's shoulders. `Now you're ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.' 
     'What about you, Sam?' said Frodo. `Aren't we going to match?' 
     `Well, Mr. Frodo, I've been  thinking,' said Sam. 'I'd best  not  leave 
any of my stuff behind, and we can't destroy it.  And  I can't wear orc-mail 
over all my clothes, can I? I'll just have to cover up.' 
     He knelt  down  and  carefully  folded his elven-cloak. It went  into a  
surprisingly small roll. This  he  put into his pack  that lay on the floor. 
Standing up, he slung  it behind his back,  put an orc-helm on  his head, and 
cast another  black cloak about  his  shoulders. `There!' he  said. `Now  we 
match, near enough. And now we must be off!' 
     'I can't go all the way at a run, Sam,' said Frodo with a wry smile. 'I  
hope you've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or  have you forgotten 
about food and drink?' 
     `Save me,  but so  I had!' said Sam.  He whistled in dismay. 'Bless me, 
Mr. Frodo, but you've gone and made me that hungry and thirsty! I don't know 
when   drop or  morsel last passed my lips. I'd forgotten it,  trying to find 
you.  But let  me  think!  Last time I looked  I'd got about enough of  that 
waybread, and of  what Captain Faramir gave us, to keep  me on my legs for a  
couple of weeks at a pinch. But if there's a drop left in my bottle, there's 

####-no more. That's  not going to be enough for two, nohow. Don't ores eat,  and 
don't they drink? Or do they just live on foul air and poison?' 
     `No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that  bred them can only mock, 
it cannot make:  not real new things of its own. I  don't think it gave life 
to the ores, it only  ruined them and twisted them; and if they are  to live 
at all, they have to live like  other living creatures. Foul waters and foul 
meats  they'll  take, if they can get no better, but not poison. They've fed 
me, and so I'm better off than you. There must be food and  water  somewhere 
in this place.' `But there's no time to look for them,' said Sam. 
     `Well, things are a bit better than you think,' said Frodo. 'I have had 
a bit of luck while you were away. Indeed they did not take everything. I've 
found my food-bag among some  rags  on  the  floor.  They've rummaged it, of 
course. But I  guess  they disliked  the very look and smell of  the lembas, 
worse than Gollum did. It's scattered about  and some  of it is trampled and 
broken,  but I've gathered  it  together. It's not far short of  what you've 
got.   But  they've   taken  Faramir's  food,  and  they've  slashed  up  my 
water -bottle.' 
     `Well,  there's no more  to  be said,' said  Sam. `We've got enough  to 
start  on.  But the water's going to be a  bad business. But come Mr. Frodo!  
Off we go, or a whole lake of it won't do us any good!' 
     'Not  till you've  had  a mouthful,  Sam,' said Frodo. `I won't  budge. 
Here, take this elven-cake, and  drink that last drop in  your  bottle!  The 
whole thing is quite hopeless, so it's no good worrying  about  tomorrow. It 
probably won't come.' 
 
     At last they started. Down the ladder  they climbed, and then Sam  took  
it and laid it in the passage beside the huddled body of the fallen orc. The 
stair was dark, but on the roof-top the glare of the Mountain could still be 
seen, though it  was dying down  now to  a  sullen red.  They  picked up two 
shields to complete their disguise and then went on. 
     Down  the great stairway they plodded. The  high chamber of the  turret 
behind, where they had met again, seemed almost homely: they were out in the 
open again  now,  and terror ran along  the walls. All might be  dead in the 
Tower of Cirith Ungol, but it was steeped in fear and evil still. 
     At length they came to the door upon the outer court, and they  halted. 
Even  from where they stood they felt the malice  of the Watchers beating on 
them, black silent shapes on either side of the gate through which the glare 

####-of Mordor dimly showed. As they threaded their way among the hideous  
bodies 
of the  ores each step became more  difficult. Before they  even reached the 
archway they were brought to a stand. To move an inch further was a pain and 
weariness to will and limb. 
     Frodo  had no  strength  for such a  battle. He sank  to the ground. `I  
can't go  on, Sam,' he  murmured. `I'm  going  to faint. I don't know what's 
come over me.' 
     `I  do, Mr.  Frodo. Hold up  now! It's  the gate.  There's some devilry 
there. But  I got  through,  and  I'm going to  get  out.  It can't be  more 
dangerous than before. Now for it!' 
     Sam drew  out the elven-glass of Galadriel again. As if to do honour to 
his hardihood, and to grace with  splendour  his faithful  brown hobbit-hand  
that had done such  deeds, the  phial blazed forth suddenly, so that all the 
shadowy  court  was  lit with  a  dazzling  radiance  like lightning; but it 
remained steady and did not pass.  
     'Gilthoniel, A  Elbereth!' Sam  cried. For, why he  did  not know,  his 
thought sprang back suddenly to  the Elves in the Shire,  and the song  that 
drove away the Black Rider in the trees.  
     'Aiya elenion ancalima!' cried Frodo once again behind him. 
     The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the snapping  
of a cord, and Frodo and Sam stumbled  forward. Then they  ran.  Through the 
gate and past the great seated figures with their glittering eyes. There was 
a crack.  The keystone of the  arch  crashed almost on  their heels, and the 
wall  above crumbled, and fell in ruin. Only  by a  hair did  they escape. A 
bell clanged; and from the Watchers there went up  a high and dreadful wail.  
Far  up above in  the darkness it was answered . Out of the  black  sky there 
came dropping like a bolt a winged shape, rending the clouds with  a ghastly  
shriek. 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Land of Shadow 

 
 
     Sam had just wits enough left to thrust the phial back into his breast. 
'Run, Mr. Frodo!' he cried.  'No, not that way! There's a sheer drop over the 
wall. Follow me!' 
     Down the  road from the  gate they  fled. In fifty paces, with a  swift  
bend  round  a jutting bastion  of the cliff, it took them out of sight from 
the Tower.  They had escaped for the moment. Cowering back  against the rock  
they drew breath, and then they clutched at their  hearts.  Perching  now on 
the wall  beside the ruined  gate the Nazgyl sent out its  deadly cries. All 
the cliffs echoed. 
     In terror they  stumbled  on. Soon the road bent sharply eastward again 
and exposed them  for  a dreadful  moment  to view from  the Tower. As  they 
flitted  across they  glanced  back  and saw the  great black shape upon the 
battlement; then they plunged down between high rock -walls in a cu tting that 
fell steeply to join  the  Morgul-road. They came to  the way-meeting. There 
was still  no sign of orcs, nor  of  an answer to the cry of the Nazgyl; but 
they  knew that the silence would not last  long. At any moment now the hunt 
would begin. 
     'This won't do, Sam,' said Frodo. 'If we were real orcs, we ought to be 
dashing back  to the  Tower, not running away. The  first enemy we meet will 
know us. We must get off this road somehow.' 
     'But we can't,' said Sam, 'not without wings.' 
     The eastern faces of the Ephel D®ath  were  sheer, falling in cliff and 
precipice to the black trough that lay between  them  and the inner ridge. A 
short way beyond the  way-meeting,  after another  steep  incline,  a flying 
bridge  of stone  leapt over the chasm  and  bore  the road  across into the 
tumbled slopes and glens of the Morgai. With a desperate spurt Frodo and Sam 
dashed along the bridge;  but  they had  hardly reached its further end when 
they  heard  the hue and cry begin. Away  behind them, now high above on the 
mountain-side, loomed  the  Tower of Cirith Ungol, its stones glowing dully. 
Suddenly its harsh bell clanged  again, and  then broke  into  a  shattering 
peal.  Horns sounded.  And now  from beyond  the  bridge-end came  
answering 
cries. Down in the dark trough,  cut off from the dying  glare of  Orodruin, 

####-Frodo  and  Sam  could not see ahead, but  already  they heard the  tramp of 
iron-shod feet, and upon the road there rang the swift clatter of hoofs. 
     'Quick, Sam!  Over we  go!'  cried Frodo. They scrambled  on to  the low 
parapet of the  bridge. Fortunately there  was no  longer any dreadful  drop 
into the  gulf, for the slopes of the Morgai had already risen almost to the 
level of the road;  but it was too dark for them to  guess  the depth of the 
fall. 
     'Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'Good-bye!' 
     He let go. Frodo followed. And even as they fell they heard the rush of 
horsemen sweeping over  the bridge  and  the rattle  of orc-feet  running up 
behind. But Sam would have laughed, if he had dared. Half fearing a breaking 
plunge down on to unseen rocks the hobbits landed, in a drop of no more than 
a dozen feet, with a thud  and  a crunch  into the last  thing that they had 
expected: a tangle of thorny bushes.  There Sam  lay still, softly sucking a  
scratched hand. 
     When  the sound of  hoof  and foot  had passed  he ventured a  whisper. 
'Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but I didn't know as anything grew in Mordor! But if I 
had a'known, this is just what I'd have  looked  for. These thorns must be a  
foot long by the feel of them; they've stuck through everything I've got on. 
Wish I'd a'put that mail -shirt on!' 
     'Orc-mail  doesn't keep  these thorns out,'  said Frodo.  'Not  even  a  
leather jerkin is any good.' 
     They had a  struggle  to get out of the thicket. The thorns  and briars 
were as tough as wire and as  clinging as  claws. Their cloaks were rent and 
tattered before they broke free at last. 
     'Now down we  go, Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'Down into  the  valley quick , 
and then turn northward, as soon as ever we can.' 
     Day was coming again in the world outside, and far beyond the glooms of 
Mordor the Sun  was climbing over the eastern  rim of Middle-earth; but here 
all was still dark as night. The Mountain smoulder ed and its fires went out. 
The glare  faded from the cliffs.  The easterly wind that  had  been blowing 
ever since  they  left  Ithilien now seemed dead.  Slowly and painfully they 
clambered down, groping, stumbling, scrambling among rock and briar and 
dead 
wood in the blind shadows, down and down until they could go no further. 
     At  length they stopped, and sat  side  by  side, their backs against a  
boulder. Both were sweating.  'If Shagrat himself was to offer me a glass of 

####-water, I'd shake his hand,' said Sam. 
     'Don't say such things!' said Frodo. 'It only makes it  worse.' Then he 
stretched himself out, dizzy and weary, and he spoke no more for a while. At 
last with a struggle he got up again. To his amazement he found that Sam was 
asleep.  'Wake  up,  Sam!'  he  said. 'Come on! It's time  we  made  another 
effort.' 
     Sam scrambled  to  his feet.  'Well I  never!' he  said.  'I  must have 
dropped off. It's a long time, Mr. Frodo, since I had a proper sleep, and my 
eyes just closed down on their own.' 
     Frodo now led the way, northward as near as he could  guess,  among the 
stones  and boulders lying thick at  the bottom of  the  great  ravine.  But 
presently he stopped again. 
     'It's no good, Sam,' he said. 'I  can't  manage  it. This mail-shirt, I 
mean. Not in my present state. Even my mithril-coat seemed heavy when I  was 
tired. This is far heavier. And what's the use of it? We shan't win  through 
by fighting.' 
     'But we may  have some to do,' said  Sam. 'And there's knives and stray 
arrows. That  Gollum isn't dead, for one thing. I don't like to think of you  
with naught but a bit of leather between you and a stab in the dark.' 
     'Look here, Sam dear lad,' said Frodo: 'I am tired, weary,  I haven't a  
hope left.  But I have to go on trying to get  to the Mountain, as long as I 
can move. The  Ring is enough. This extra  weight is killing me. It must go. 
But don't think  I'm ungrateful. I hate  to think of the foul work  you must  
have had among the bodies to find it for me.' 
     'Don't talk about it, Mr. Frodo. Bless you! I'd  carry you  on my back, 
if I could. Let it go then!' 
     Frodo laid aside his cloak and took off the orc-mail and flung it away. 
He shivered a little. 'What I really need is something warm,' he said. 'It's 
gone cold, or else I've caught a chill.' 
     'You can have my cloak,  Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. He unslung his  pack and  
took out the elven-cloak. 'How's  this, Mr.  Frodo?' he said. 'You wrap that 
orc-rag close round you, and  put the belt outside it. Then this can go over 
all.  It  don't  look quite orc-fashion, but it'll  keep you  warmer; and  I 
daresay it'll  keep you from harm better than any other gear. It was made by 
the Lady.' 
     Frodo took the cloak and fastened the brooch. 'That's better!' he said. 
'I feel much lighter. I  can go  on now.  But this  blind dark  seems to  be 

####-getting into my  heart.  As I lay in  prison,  Sam. I tried to  remember the 
Brandywine, and  Woody  End,  and  The  Water  running  through  the mill at 
Hobbiton. But I can't see them now.' 
     'There  now, Mr.  Frodo, it's you  that's  talking of water this time!' 
said Sam. 'If only the  Lady could see us or hear us, I'd say to  her: (Your 
Ladyship,  all  we  want is  light  and  water:  just clean water and  plain 
daylight, better than any jewels,  begging your pardon.( But it's a long way 
to Lurien.' Sam sighed and waved his  hand towards the heights of the  Ephel 
D®ath, now only to be guessed as a deeper blackness against the black sky. 
 
     They  started  off again. They  had not gone  far  when  Frodo  paused.  
'There's a Black Rider over us,' he said. 'I can feel it. We had better keep 
still for a while.' 
     Crouched under  a great  boulder they sat facing back  westward and did 
not speak  for some  time. Then  Frodo  breathed  a  sigh of  relief.  'It's 
passed,' he said.  They  stood up, and then they both stared in wonder. Away 
to their left, southward, against a sky that was turning grey, the peaks and 
high  ridges  of  the great range began  to appear  dark and black,  visible 
shapes. Light  was growing behind them.  Slowly it crept towards the  North. 
There  was battle far above  in  the high spaces of the  air. The  billowing 
clouds of Mordor were being driven back, their edges tattering as a wind out 
of  the living world came up and swept the fumes and smokes towards the dark 
land of their home. Under  the lifting skirts of the dreary canopy dim light 
leaked into Mordor like pale morning through the grimed window of a prison. 
     'Look at it, Mr. Frodo!'  said  Sam. 'Look  at it!  The wind's changed. 
Something's happening. He's not having it all  his own way.  His darkness is 
breaking up out in the world there. I wish I could see what is going on!' 
     It was  the morning  of the fifteenth of  March,  and over the  Vale of 
Anduin the Sun was rising  above the eastern shadow, and the south-west wind 
was blowing. Thjoden lay dying on the Pelennor Fields.  
     As Frodo and Sam stood and gazed, the rim of light spread all along the 
line  of the Ephel D®ath, and then they saw a shape, moving at a great speed 
out of  the West, at first only a  black speck against  the glimmering strip 
above the mountain-tops, but  growing, until it plunged like a bolt into the 
dark canopy and passed high above them. As it went it sent out a long shrill  
cry, the voice of a Nazgyl; but this cry no longer held any terror for them: 
it was a cry of woe and dismay, ill tidings for the Dark Tower. The Lord  of 

####-the Ring-wraiths had met his doom. 
     'What did I tell you? Something's happening!'  cried Sam. '  (The  war's 
going well,(  said Shagrat; but Gorbag he  wasn't so sure. And  he was right 
there too. Things are looking up, Mr. Frodo. Haven't you got some hope now?' 
     'Well  no,  not much,  Sam,'  Frodo  sighed. 'That's  away  beyond  the 
mountains.  We're going east not west. And I'm  so tired. And the Ring  is so  
heavy, Sam.  And  I begin to  see it in my mind  all the time, like a  great 
wheel of fire.' 
     Sam's  quick  spirits  sank again  at  once. He  looked  at  his master  
anxiously, and he took his hand.  'Come, Mr.  Frodo!' he said. 'I've got one 
thing  I  wanted: a bit of light. Enough  to help  us, and yet I guess  it's 
dangerous too. Try a bit further,  and then we'll lie close and have a rest. 
But take a morsel to eat now, a bit of the E lves' food; it may hearten you.' 
     Sharing  a  wafer of   lembas, and  munching it as  best they could with 
their parched  mouths. Frodo and Sam  plodded on. The light,  though no more 
than a grey  dusk, was now enough for them to see that they were deep in the 
valley  between  the mountains. It sloped  up gently  northward,  and at its 
bottom  went the bed  of a now dry  and  withered stream.  Beyond  its stony 
course  they saw a beaten  path that  wound  its way under the  feet of  the 
westward cliffs. Had they known,  they could have reached it quicker, for it 
was a track that  left the main Morgul-road at the  western  bridge-end  and 
went down  by  a long stair cut in the rock to the valley's  bottom.  It was 
used  by  patrols  or  by  messengers going  swiftly  to  lesser  posts  and 
strongholds north-away, between Cirith Ungol and the narrows of  Isenmouthe, 
the iron jaws of Carach Angren. 
     It was  perilous for the hobbits to use  such  a path,  but they needed 
speed, and  Frodo felt that he could not face the  toil of  scrambling among 
the boulders or in the trackless glens  of  the Morgai. And  he  judged that 
northward was, maybe, the way that their hunters would least expect them  to 
take.  The  road east  to the plain, or the pass back westward,  those  they 
would first search most thoroughly. Only when he was well north of the Tower  
did he mean to turn and seek for some way to take him east, east on the last 
desperate  stage of his journey. So now  they crossed the stony bed and took  
to  the orc-path, and  for some time  they  marched along  it. The cliffs at 
their left  were overhung, and they could  not be seen  from above; but  the 
path made many bends, and at each  bend they  gripped their  sword-hilts and 
went forward cautiously. 

####-     The  light grew no stronger,  for  Orodruin was still belching forth  a  
great  fume that, beaten  upwards by  the  opposing airs, mounted higher and  
higher,  until it  reached  a  region  above  the  wind  and  spread  in  an 
immeasurable roof, whose central pillar rose out of the shadows beyond their 
view. They had  trudged for more than an hour  when they heard a sound  that 
brought them to a halt. Unbelievable, but unmistakable. Water trickling. Out 
of a gully on the left, so sharp  and narrow  that it look ed as if the black  
cliff had been cloven by some  huge  axe, water came dripping down: the last 
remains, maybe, of some sweet rain gathered  from sunlit seas, but ill-fated 
to  fall at last upon the walls of  the Black Land and wander fruitless down 
into  the dust. Here it came out of  the rock in a little falling streamlet, 
and  flowed  across the path, and turning south  ran away swiftly to be lost  
among the dead stones.  
     Sam sprang towards it. 'If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her!' 
he cried . 'Light  and now  water!' Then he stopped. 'Let me  drink first Mr. 
Frodo,' he said. 
     'All right, but there's room enough for two.' 
     'I didn't  mean  that,'  said  Sam.  'I  mean:  if it's  poisonous,  or  
something  that will  show  its  badness quick, well,  better me  than  you, 
master, if you understand me.' 
     'I do. But I think we'll trust our luck together, Sam; or our blessing. 
Still, be careful now, if it's very cold!' 
     The water was cool but not icy, and it had an unpleasant taste, a t once 
bitter and  oily, or  so they would have said at home. Here it seemed beyond 
all  praise, and beyond fear  or  prudence. They  drank their  fill, and Sam 
replenished his water -bottle. After that Frodo felt easier, and they went on 
for several miles, until the broadening of the road and  the beginnings of a  
rough wall along its edge warned them that they were drawing near to another  
orc-hold. 
     'This  is  where  we  turn aside, Sam,' said  Frodo. 'And we  must turn 
east.'  He  sighed as he looked a t  the gloomy ridges across the  valley. 'I  
have just about  enough strength left to find  some hole  away up there. And  
then I must rest a little.' 
     The river -bed  was now some way  below the path. They scrambled down to 
it,  and began to cross  it. To their surprise they came upon dark pools fed 
by  threads  of water trickling down from some source  higher up the valley.  

####-Upon its  outer marges under the westward mountains Mordor was a dying 
land, 
but it was not yet dead. And here things still grew, harsh, twisted, bitter, 
struggling  for life. In  the glens of the Morgai on the other  side  of the 
valley low scrubby trees lurked and clung, coarse grey grass-tussocks fought  
with the stones,  and withered mosses crawled on them; and  everywhere great 
writhing, tangled brambles sprawled. Some  had  long stabbing  thorns,  some 
hooked barbs that rent like knives. The sullen shrivelled leaves of  a  past  
year  hung on  them,  grating  and  rattling  in  the  sad airs,  but  their 
maggot-ridden buds were  only  just  opening. Flies,  dun or grey, or black, 
marked like ores with a red  eye-shaped blotch, buzzed and stung;  and above 
the briar-thickets clouds of hungry midges danced and reeled. 
     'Orc-gear's no  good,' said Sam, waving his  arms. 'I  wish I'd  got  an 
orc's hide!' 
     At  last Frodo  could  go  no further.  They had  climbed  up  a narrow 
shelving ravine, but  they still had a long way to go before they could even 
come in sight of the last craggy ridge. 'I must rest  now, Sam, and sleep if 
I can.' said Frodo.  He looked  about, but there seemed  nowhere even for an 
animal to crawl into  in this  dismal  country.  At length,  tired out, they 
slunk  under a  curtain  of brambles that hung  down  like a  mat over a low 
rock-face. 
     There  they sat and  made such a meal as they could. Keeping  back  the 
precious  lembas for the evil days ahead, they ate the half of what remained 
in Sam's bag of Faramir's provision: some  dried fruit, and a small  slip of 
cured meat; and they sipped some water. They  had drunk again from the pools 
in the valley, but they were very, thirsty again. There was a bitter tang in 
the air of Mordor  that dried the mouth. When Sam thought of water  even his 
hopeful spirit quailed.  Beyond  the Morgai there was the dreadful plain  of 
Gorgoroth to cross.  
     'Now  you go to  sleep first, Mr. Frodo,' he said.  'It's getting  dark 
again. I reckon this day is nearly over.' 
     Frodo sighed and was  asleep almost before  the words were  spoken. Sam 
struggled with his own weariness, and he took Frodo's hand; and there he sat 
silent till deep night fell. Then at last, to keep himself awake, he crawled 
from  the hiding-place and looked out. The land seemed full of creaking  and 
cracking and sly noises, but there was  no  sound of  voice or  of foot. Far 
above the  Ephel D®ath  in the West  the night-sky  was still dim and  pale. 

####-There,  peeping among the cloud-wrack  above  a  dark  tor high  up  in  the 
mountains, Sam saw a white star twinkle for  a while. The beauty of it smote  
his heart, as he looked  up  out  of the forsaken land, and hope returned to 
him. For like  a shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced  him that in the 
end the Shadow was  only a small and passing thing: there was light and high 
beauty for ever beyond  its reach. His song in  the Tower had been  defiance 
rather  than hope;  for  then he was thinking of himself. Now, for a moment,  
his own fate,  and even his masters, ceased to trouble him. He crawled  back  
into the  brambles and  laid  himself by Frodo's side ,  and putting away all 
fear he cast himself into a deep untroubled sleep. 
     They woke  together, hand in  hand.  Sam was  almost fresh,  ready  for  
another day; but Frodo sighed.  His sleep had been uneasy, full of dreams of 
fire, and  waking  brought  him no comfort.  Still  his sleep  had not  been 
without  all healing virtue: he was stronger, more able  to  bear his burden 
one stage further. They did not know the time, nor how long  they had slept;  
but after a morsel of food and a sip of water  they went  on up  the ravine, 
until it ended in a sharp slope of screes and sliding stones. There the last  
living things gave up their struggle; the tops of the Morgai were grassless,  
bare, jagged, barren as a slate. 
     After much wandering and search they found a way that they could climb, 
and with a last hundred feet  of clawing scramble they were up. They came to 
a cleft between two dark crags, and passing through found  themselves on the 
very edge of the last  fence of Mordor. Below them, at the  bottom of a fall 
of  some fifteen hundred feet,  lay  the inner plain stretching away into  a  
formless gloom beyond their sight. The wind  of the world blew now from  the 
West, and  the great clouds  were lifted  high,  floating away eastward; but 
still only a grey  light came to the dreary fields of Gorgoroth. There smokes 
trailed on the ground and lurked in hollows, and fumes  leaked from fissures 
in the earth. 
     Still far away, forty  miles  at least,  they  saw Mount Doom, its feet 
founded in  ashen ruin, its huge cone rising  to  a great height,  where its 
reeking  head was swathed in cloud. Its fires were now  dimmed, and it stood 
in smouldering slumber, as threatening and  dangerous as a  sleeping  beast.  
Behind it there hung a vast shadow, ominous as a thunder-cloud, the veils of 
Barad-dyr  that was  reared far  way upon a long spur of the Ashen Mountains 
thrust down from the North. The Dark Power was deep in  thought, and the Eye 
turned inward, pondering tidings of doubt and danger: a  bright sword, and a  

####-stern  and kingly face  it  saw, and for  a while it gave  little thought to 
other things;  and  all its great  stronghold, gate on  gate,  and tower  on 
tower, was wrapped in a brooding gloom. 
     Frodo and Sam gazed out in  mingled loathing and wonder on this hateful 
land. Between them and  the smoking mountain, and about  it north and south, 
all seemed ruinous and dead, a  desert burned  and choked. They wondered 
how 
the Lord of  this realm maintained  and  fed his  slaves and his armies. Yet 
armies he had.  As far as their  eyes could reach, along the  skirts  of the 
Morgai and away southward,  there were camps, some  of tents,  some  ordered 
like small towns. One of the largest of these was right below them. Barely a  
mile  out into  the  plain it clustered like some huge nest of insects, with 
straight dreary streets of huts  and  long low drab buildings. About it  the 
ground  was  busy  with folk  going  to and  fro; a  wide  road  ran from it 
south-east to join the  Morgul-way, and along it  many  lines of small black  
shapes were hurrying. 
     'I don't like the look of things at all,' said Sam. 'Pretty hopeless, I 
call it  - saving that where there's such  a lot of folk  there must be wells 
or water, not to mention  food. And these  are Men not Orcs,  or  my eyes are 
all wrong.' 
     Neither  he nor Frodo knew  anything of  the great slave-worked  fields 
away south  in this wide realm, beyond the fumes of the Mountain by the dark 
sad waters  of Lake  N®rnen; nor of  the great roads that ran away  east and 
south to tributary lands, from which the soldiers of the Tower  brought long  
waggon-trains of goods  and booty and fresh  slaves. Here  in  the northward 
regions were the mines and forges, and the musterings of  long-planned  war; 
and  here the  Dark  Power, moving its armies like pieces on the  board, was 
gathering them together. Its first moves, the first feelers of its strength, 
had been  checked  upon  its western  line, southward and northward. For the 
moment  it withdrew  them,  and  brought  up new forces, massing  them about 
Cirith Gorgor for an avenging stroke. And if it had also been its purpose to 
defend the Mountain against all approach, it could scarcely have done more. 
     'Well!' Sam went on. 'Whatever they have to eat and drink, we can't get 
it. There's no way down that I can see. And we couldn't cross  all that open 
country crawling with enemies, even if we did get down.' 
     'Still  we  shall  have to  try,'  said  Frodo.  'It's  no worse than I 
expected. I never hoped to get across. I can't see any  hope  of it now. But 

####-I've  still  got  to do the best I can. At  present that  is to avoid  being 
captured  as long as possible.  So we must still go northwards, I think, and 
see what it is like where the open plain is narrower.' 
     'I guess what it'll be like,' said  Sam. 'Where it's narrower the  Orcs 
and Men will just be packed closer. You'll see, Mr. Frodo.' 
     'I dare say I shall, if  we ever get so  far,'  said  Frodo  and turned 
away. 
     They  soon  found that it was impossible  to  make their way  along the 
crest of  the Morgai, or anywhere along its  higher levels, pathless as they 
were  and scored with deep ghylls. In the end they were  forced to  go  back  
down the ravine that they had  climbed and seek for a way  along the valley. 
It was  rough going,  for  they  dared not  cross  over  to the  path on the 
westward side. After a mile or more  they  saw,  huddled in a  hollow at the 
cliff's foot,  the orc-hold that  they had guessed  was near at hand: a wall 
and a cluster of stone huts set about the dark mouth of a cave. There was no  
movement to be seen, but the hobbits crept by cautiously, keeping as much as 
they  could  to the thorn-brakes that  grew thickly at this point along both 
sides of the old water -course. 
     They went two or three miles further, and  the orc-hold was hidden from 
sight behind them; but  they had hardly begun  to breathe  more freely again 
when harsh and loud they heard orc-voices. Quickly  they  slunk out of sight 
behind a brown and stunted bush.  The voices drew nearer. Presently two orcs 
came  into view. One was  clad in ragged  brown and was armed with a  bow of 
horn;  it was of  a small  breed, black -skinned,  with  wide  and  snuffling 
nostrils:  evidently  a   tracker  of  some  kind.  The  other  was   a  big 
fighting-orc, like those of Shagrat's company, bearing the token of the Eye. 
He  also had  a  bow at his back and carried  a short broad-headed spear. As 
usual they  were  quarrelling, and  being of  different breeds they used the 
Common Speech a fter their fashion. 
     Hardly  twenty  paces  from where the  hobbits  lurked  the  small  orc 
stopped. 'Nar!' it snarled. 'I'm going  home.' It  pointed across the valley 
to  the orc-hold. 'No good wearing my nose out  on  stones any more. There's 
not a  trace left, I say. I've lost the scent through  giving way to you. It 
went up into the hills, not along the valley, I tell you.' 
     'Not  much use  are you,  you little snufflers?' said the  big  orc. 'I  
reckon eyes are better than your snotty noses.' 
     'Then what  have  you  seen with them?' snarled the  other.  'Garn! You  

####-don't even know what you're looking for.' 
     'Whose  blame's that?'  said the  soldier. 'Not mine. That  comes  from 
Higher Up.  First they  say  it's a great Elf in bright armour, then  it's a  
sort of small dwarf-man, then it must be a pack of rebel Uruk -hai; or  maybe  
it's all the lot together.' 
     'Ar!' said the tracker. 'They've lost their  heads, that's what it  is.  
And some of the bosses are going to lose their skins too, I guess, if what I 
hear is true: Tower raided and all, and hundreds of your  lads done in,  and 
prisoner got  away.  If that's  the  way you fighters  go on,  small  wonder 
there's bad news from the battles.' 
     'Who says there's bad news?' shouted the soldier. 
     'Ar! Who says there isn't?' 
     'That's cursed rebel-talk, and I'll  stick  you, if  you don't shut  it 
down, see?' 
     'All right, all right!' said  the tracker. 'I'll say  no more and go on 
thinking.  But what's  the black  sneak got to do with  it all? That gobbler  
with the flapping hands?' 
     'I  don't know. Nothing, maybe.  But he's up to no good, nosing around, 
I'll  wager. Curse him! No sooner had  he slipped us and run  off than  word 
came he's wanted alive, wanted quick.' 
     'Well,  I hope they  get  him and  put him  through  it,'  growled  the 
tracker.  'He  messed up  the  scent  back  there,  pinching  that  cast -off 
mail-shirt  that he  found,  and paddling all round the place before I could 
get there.' 
     'It  saved his  life anyhow,' said  the soldier. 'Why, before I knew he 
was wanted I shot him, as neat as neat, at fifty  paces  right in the  back; 
but he ran on.' 
     'Garn!  You missed him,' said the  tracker. 'First you shoot wild, then 
you run too  slow, and then you  send for the poor trackers. I've had enough 
of you.' He loped off. 
     'You come back,' shouted the soldier, 'or I'll report you!' 
     'Who to? Not to your precious Shagrat. He won't be captain any more.' 
     'I'll  give  your  name and  number  to the Nazgyl,'  said  the soldier  
lowering his voice to a hiss. 'One of them's in charge at the Tower now.' 
     The other halted, and his voice was  full of fear and rage. 'You cursed 
peaching sneakthief!' he yelled. 'You can't do  your job, and you can't even 
stick by your own folk. Go to your filthy Shriekers, and may they freeze the 

####-flesh off you! If the enemy  doesn't get them  first. They've done in Number  
One, I've heard, and I hope it's true!' 
     The big orc, spear in hand, leapt after him. But the tracker, springing 
behind  a  stone,  put an arrow in  his eye as he ran up, and he fell with a  
crash. The other ran off across the valley and disappeared. 
     For a while the hobbits sat in silence. At length  Sam stirred. 'Well I 
call  that  neat as neat,'  he said. 'If this nice friendliness would spread 
about in Mordor, half our trouble would be over.' 
     'Quietly,  Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'There  may be  others about. We have 
evidently had  a very narrow escape,  and the  hunt was hotter on our tracks 
than we guessed. But that is the spirit of Mordor, Sam; and it has spread to 
every corner of it. Orcs have always behaved like that, or so all tales say, 
when they are on their own. But you can't get much hope out of it. They hate 
us far  more,  altogether  and all the time. If  those two had seen us, they 
would have dropped all their quarrel until we were dead.' 
     There was another long silence. Sam broke it again,  but with a whisper  
this time.  'Did you hear what they  said  about  that gobbler, Mr.  Frodo? I 
told you Gollum wasn't dead yet, didn't I?' 
     'Yes, I remember. And I wondered  how you knew,' said Frodo. 'Well come 
now!  I think we had better not move out from here again,  until it has gone 
quite dark. So  you shall tell me how you know, a nd all about what happened. 
If you can do it quietly.' 
     'I'll try,' said Sam, 'but when I think of  that Stinker I get so hot l 
could shout.' 
     There the hobbits sat under the  cover  of  the  thorny bush, while the 
drear light of  Mordor faded slowly into a deep and starless night; and  Sam 
spoke into Frodo's  ear  all  that he  could  find  words  for  of  Gollum's 
treacherous  attack, the  horror of Shelob, and his  own adventures with the 
orcs. When  he  had finished,  Frodo said nothing  but  took  Sam's hand and  
pressed it. At length he stirred. 
     'Well, I  suppose  we  must be going on  again,' he said. 'I wonder how 
long it will be before  we really are  caught  and all the  toiling and  the 
slinking will be over, and in vain.'  He stood up. 'It's dark, and we cannot 
use the  Lady's glass. Keep it safe  for me, Sam. I  have nowhere to keep it 
now, except in my hand, and  I shall need both hands in the blind night. But 
Sting I give to you. I have  got an orc-blade, but I do not think it will be 
my part to strike any blow again.' 

####-     It  was difficult and dangerous moving in  the  night  in the  pathless 
land; but slowly and with much  stumbling the two hobbits  toiled on hour by 
hour northward along the eastern edge of the stony valley. When a grey light 
crept back over the western  heights, long after day had opened in the lands 
beyond, they went into hiding again and slept a little, turn by turn. In his 
times  of waking  Sam  was busy  with thoughts  of food. At  last when Frodo 
roused himself and spoke of eating and making ready for yet  another effort, 
he asked the question that was troubling him most. 
     'Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he said, 'but have you any notion how 
far there is still to go?' 
     'No, not any clear notion, Sam, ' Frodo answered. 'In Rivendell before I 
set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before the Enemy came 
back 
here; but I only remember it  vaguely. I remember clearest  that there was a  
place in the north where the western  range and the  northern range send out 
spurs that nearly meet. That must be twenty leagues at least from the bridge  
back by the  Tower.  It might be  a  good point at which  to cross.  But  of 
course, if we get there, we shall be further than we were from the Mountain, 
sixty miles from it,  I should think. I guess that we have gone about twelve 
leagues  north from the bridge now.  Even if  all goes  well, I could hardly 
reach  the Mountain in  a week. I am afraid, Sam, that the  burden  will get 
very heavy, and I shall go still slower as we get nearer.' 
     Sam  sighed. 'That's just as I feared,' he said. 'Well,  to say nothing 
of water, we've got to eat less, Mr.  Frodo,  or else move a bit quicker, at 
any rate while we're still in this valley. One more bite  and all the food's 
ended, save the Elves' waybread.' 
     'I'll try  and be  a  bit  quicker, Sam,'  said  Frodo,  drawing a deep 
breath. 'Come on then! Let's start another march!' 
     It was not yet quite dark again. They plodded along, on into the night. 
The hours passed in  a weary stumbling trudge with a few brief halts. At the 
first  hint of grey light  under the skirts of the canopy of shadow they hid 
themselves again in a dark hollow under an overhanging stone. 
     Slowly  the  light  grew, until it  was clearer than it yet had been. A 
strong wind from the West was now driving the fumes of Mordor from the 
upper 
airs. Before long the hobbits could make out the shape of the land for  some 
miles  about  them.  The trough  between the  mountains  and  the Morgai had 

####-steadily dwindled as it climbed upwards, and the inner ridge was now no more 
than a shelf in the steep faces of the Ephel D®ath; but to  the east it fell 
as  sheerly as  ever down into Gorgoroth. Ahead the water -course came  to an 
end in broken steps of rock; for out from the main range there sprang a high 
barren spur, thrusting  eastward like a wall. To meet it there stretched out 
from the grey and misty  northern  range  of Ered Lithui a long jutting arm; 
and between the ends there  was a narrow gap: Carach Angren, the Isenmouthe, 
beyond  which lay the deep  dale of Udyn.  In that dale  behind the Morannon 
were the tunnels and deep armouries that the servants of Mordor had made for  
the defence of the Black Gate of their  land; and there now  their  Lord was 
gathering in haste great forces to meet the onslaught of the Captains of the 
West. Upon the out-thrust spurs forts and towers were built, and watch-fires 
burned;  and all  across  the gap an earth-wall had been  raised, and a deep 
trench delved that could be crossed only by a single bridge. 
     A few miles north, high up in the angle where the western spur branched 
away from the main range, stood the old castle  of Durthang, now one of  the 
many orc-holds  that  clustered about  the dale of  Udyn.  A  road,  already 
visible in the growing light, came winding  down from it, until only a  mile 
or two from where the hobbits  lay it turned east and ran along a  shelf cut 
in the side of the  spur, and so went  down  into the plain,  and  on to the 
Isenmouthe. 
     To  the hobbits as  they  looked  out it seemed that all their  journey 
north had been useless. The plain to their right was dim and smoky, and they 
could  see  there  neither camps nor troops moving; but all  that region was 
under the vigilance of the for ts of Carach Angren. 
     'We have  come to a dead end, Sam,'  said Frodo. 'If we go on, we shall 
only come up to that orc-tower, but the only  road to take is that road that 
comes down from it - unless we go back. We can't climb up westward, or climb 
down eastward.' 
     'Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'We must take it and 
chance our luck,  if there is  any  luck in  Mordor. We  might as  well give 
ourselves up as wander  about any more,  or try  to go back. Our  food won't  
last. We've got to make a dash for it!' 
     'All right, Sam,' said Frodo. 'Lead me! As long as  you've got any hope 
left. Mine is gone. But I can't dash, Sam. I'll just plod along after you.' 
     'Before  you start  any more  plodding,  you need  sleep and food,  Mr. 
Frodo. Come and take what you can get of them!' 

####-     He gave  Frodo  water  and an additional wafer of the  waybread, and he 
made  a pillow of his cloak for his master's  head. Frodo  was too  weary to 
debate the matter, and Sam did not tell  him that he had drunk the last drop 
of  their water, and eaten Sam's share of the food as well as  his own. When 
Frodo was asleep Sam bent over him and listened to his breathing and scanned 
his  face. It  was  lined and thin, and yet in  sleep it looked  content and 
unafraid. 'Well, here goes, Master!' Sam muttered  to himself. 'I'll have to 
leave you for a bit  and trust to luck. Water we must have, or we'll  get no 
further.' 
     Sam  crept  out,  and flitting  from  stone to  stone  with  more  than 
hobbit-care, he went down to the water -course, and then followed it for some 
way as it climbed  north, until he came to the rock -steps where long ago, no  
doubt,  its spring had come gushing  down  in  a little  waterfall. All  now 
seemed dry and silent; but refusing to despair Sam stooped and listened, and 
to his  delight he caught the sound of  trickling. Clambering a few steps up 
he found a tiny stream of dark water that came out  from the  hill -side  and 
filled a  little bare pool,  from which again it spilled, and vanished  then 
under the barren stones. 
     Sam tasted the water, and it seemed good enough. Then  he drank deeply,  
refilled the  bottle,  and turned  to go back.  At that  moment he caught  a  
glimpse of a black form or shadow flitting among the rocks away near Frodo's 
hiding-place.  Biting  back  a cry, he leapt  down from the spring and  ran, 
jumping from stone to stone. It was  a  wary creature, difficult to see, but 
Sam had little doubt about it: he longed to get  his hands on its  neck. But 
it heard him coming and  slipped quickly away.  Sam  thought he  saw a  last  
fleeting  glimpse  of  it,  peering  back  over  the  edge  of the  eastward 
precipice, before it ducked and disappeared. 
     'Well, luck did not let me  down,' muttered Sam,  'but that was a  near 
thing! Isn't it enough  to have orcs by the  thousand  without that stinking 
villain coming nosing round? I wish he had been  shot!' He sat down by Frodo 
and did not rouse him; but he did not dare to  go to  sleep himself. At last  
when he felt his eyes closing and knew that his struggle to keep awake could 
not go on much longer, he wakened Frodo gently. 
     'That  Gollum's  about   again,  I'm  afraid,  Mr.  Frodo,'   he  said. 
'Leastways, if  it wasn't  him, then there's two of him. I went away to find 
some water and  spied  him nosing  round just as I  turned back. I reckon it 
isn't safe  for us  both to sleep  together,  and begging your pardon, but I 

####-can't hold up my lids much longer.' 
     'Bless you, Sam!' said Frodo. 'Lie down  and take your pr oper turn! But 
I'd rather have Gollum than orcs. At any rate he  won't give us away to them 
- not unless he's caught himself.' 
     'But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on  his own,' growled Sam.  
'Keep your eyes open,  Mr. Frodo! There's  a bottle full of water. Drink up. 
We can fill it again when we go on.' With that Sam plunged into sleep. 
     Light was fading when  he  woke.  Frodo sat  propped  against  the rock  
behind, but he  had fallen asleep. The water-bottle  was empty. There was no 
sign of Gollum. 
     Mordor -dark  had returned, and the watch-fires on  the  heights  burned 
fierce and red, when the hobbits  set out  again on the most dangerous stage 
of all  their  journey.  They  went first  to  the  little  spring, and then 
climbing warily up they  came to the road at the  point  where it swung east  
towards  the Isenmouthe  twenty miles away. It was not a broad road, and  it  
had  no wall  or parapet along the edge and as it ran on the sheer drop from 
its brink became deeper and deeper. The hobbits could hear no movements, and 
after listening for a while they set off eastward at a steady pace. 
     After doing some twelve miles, they halted. A short  way back the  road 
had  bent a  little northward and  the stretch that they had passed over was 
now screened  from  sight.  This proved  disastrous. They  rested  for  some 
minutes and then went on; but they had not taken many steps when suddenly in 
the stillness of  the  night they  heard the  sound that all along  they had 
secretly dreaded: the   noise of marching feet. It was still some way  behind 
them, but looking  back they could see  the twinkle of torches  coming round 
the  bend less  than  a mile away,  and they  were moving fast: too fast for  
Frodo to escape by flight along the road ahead. 
     'I feared  it, Sam,' said Frodo. 'We've  trusted to luck,  and  it  has 
failed  us.  We're trapped.' He looked wildly up at the frowning wall, where 
the road-builders of old had cut the rock sheer for many fathoms above their  
heads. He ran to the other side and looked over the brink into a dark pit of 
gloom.  'We're trapped at last!' he said He sank to the  ground beneath  the 
wall of rock and bowed his head. 
     'Seems so,' said Sam. 'Well, we can but wait and see.' And with that he 
sat down beside Frodo under the shadow of the cliff. 
     They did  not have  to wait long. The orcs were going at a  great pace. 
Those in the foremost files  bore torches.  On they  came, red flames in the 

####-dark, swiftly growing. Now Sam too bowed his head, hoping that it  would hide 
his face when the  torches reached  them; and he  set  their  shields before 
their knees to hide their feet. 
     'If only  they  are in a hurry and will let a couple of tired  soldiers 
alone and pass on!' he thought. 
     And so it  seemed that they would. The leading  orcs came loping along, 
panting, holding their  heads down. They  were  a gang of the smaller breeds 
being driven unwilling to their Dark Lord's wars; all they cared for  was to 
get the march over and escape the whip. Beside them, running up and down the 
line, went two of the large fierce uruks, cracking lashes and shouting. File 
after file passed, and the tell-tale torchlight was  already some way ahead. 
Sam held his  breath. Now more than half the line had gone by. Then suddenly 
one of the slave-drivers spied the two figures  by the road-side. He flicked 
a whip at them and yelled:  'Hi, you! Get up!' They did not answer, and with 
a shout he halted the whole company. 
     'Come on, you slugs!' he cried.  'This is  no time  for  sl ouching.' He 
took a step towards them, and even in the gloom he recognized the devices on 
their shields.  'Deserting,  eh?'  he snarled.  'Or thinking of it? All your 
folk  should  have been inside Udyn before yesterday evening. You know that. 
Up you get and fall in, or I'll have your numbers and report you.' 
     They  struggled to their  feet, and keeping bent, limping like footsore 
soldiers, they shuffled back towards the rear  of  the line. 'No, not at the 
rear!' the slave-driver shouted.  'Three files up. And stay there, or you'll 
know it,  when I come down the line!' He sent his  long  whip-lash  cracking  
over their heads; then with another crack  and a yell he started the company 
off again at a brisk trot. 
     It was hard enough for poor Sam, tired a s he was;  but for Frodo it was 
a torment, and soon a nightmare. He set his teeth and tried to stop his mind 
from  thinking, and he struggled  on. The stench of the sweating  orcs about 
him was stifling, and he began to gasp with thirst. On, on they went, and he 
bent  all  his will to draw his breath and to make  his legs keep going; and 
yet to  what evil end  he toiled and endured he did not dare to think. There 
was no hope of falling out  unseen: Now and  again the orc-driver fell  back  
and jeered at them. 
     'There now!' he laughed, flicking at their  legs. 'Where there's a whip 
there's a  will, my slugs. Hold up! I'd give you a nice freshener  now, only 
you'll get  as much lash as your skins will  carry when you come in late  to 

####-your camp. Do you good. Don't you know we're at war?' 
     They had gone some miles, and the road was at  last running down a long  
slope into the plain, when  Frodo's  strength began to give out and his will 
wavered. He lurched and stumbled. Desperately Sam tried to help him and hold 
him up,  though  he felt  that he could  himself hardly  stay  the pace much 
longer.  At any moment now he knew that the end would come: his master 
would 
faint or fall, and  all would be discovered, and  their bitter efforts be in 
vain.  'I'll have that big slave-driving devil anyway,' he thought. 
     Then just as  he  was putting his hand  to the hilt of his sword, there 
came an unexpected relief.  They were out on the plain now and drawing  near 
the entrance to Udyn. Some  way in  front  of it,  before  the  gate  at the 
bridge-end, the  road  from the  west converged with others coming from  the 
south, and from Barad-dyr.  Along all the roads troops were moving; for  the  
Captains  of  the  West  were  advancing  and the Dark Lord was speeding his 
forces  north.  So it  chanced that  several companies came together at  the 
road-meeting, in the dark beyond the light of  the watch-fires on the  wall. 
At once there was great  jostling  and  cursing as  each troop  tried to get 
first to the gate and the ending of  their march.  Though the drivers yelled 
and plied  their whips, scuffles broke out and  some blades  were  drawn.  A 
troop of heavy-armed uruks from Barad-dyr charged into the Durthang line and 
threw them into confusion. 
     Dazed as he  was with  pain and weariness, Sam woke up, grasped quickly 
at his chance, and  threw  himself to the  ground, dragging Frodo down  with  
him. Orcs fell over them, snarling and  cursing. Slowly on hand and knee the 
hobbits  crawled  away  out of  the  turmoil, until  at last unnoticed  they 
dropped  over the  further edge of the road. It  had a  high kerb  by  which 
troop-leaders could  guide  themselves  in black night or  fog,  and it  was 
banked up some feet above the level of the open land. 
     They  lay still   for a while.  It  was too dark to  seek  for cover, if 
indeed there was any to  find; but Sam felt that  they ought at least to get 
further away from the highways and out of the range of torch-light. 
     'Come on, Mr. Frodo!' he whispered.  'One more  crawl, and then you can 
lie still.' 
     With a last despairing effort Frodo  raised  himself on  his hands, and 
struggled on for maybe twenty yards. Then he pitched down into a shallow pit 
that opened unexpectedly before them, and there he lay like a dead thing. 

####- 
 

Chapter 3. Mount Doom 

 
 
     Sam put his ragged orc-cloak under  his master's head, and covered them 
both with the grey robe of Lurien; and as he did so his thoughts went out to 
that fair land, and to the Elves, and he hoped that the cloth woven by their 
hands  might  have some virtue to keep them  hidden beyond all hope  in this 
wilderness of fear. He heard the  scuffling and cries die down as the troops 
passed  on through the Isenmouthe. It seemed that in the confusion  and  the 
mingling of many  companies of various  kinds  they had not been missed, not 
yet at any rate. 
     Sam  took a sip of water, but pressed Frodo  to  drink,  and  when  his 
master had recovered a little he gave  him a whole  wafer of their  precious 
waybread and made  him  ea t it. Then, too worn out even to  feel  much fear,  
they stretched themselves out. They slept a little in uneasy fits; for their 
sweat grew chill on  them, and the  hard stones bit them, and they shivered. 
Out of  the north from the  Black Gate  through  Cirith  Gorgor there flowed 
whispering along the ground a thin cold air. 
     In the morning a  grey light came again, for  in  the high regions  the 
West Wind  still blew, but down on the stones behind the fences of the Black 
Land the air seemed almost dead, chill  and yet stifling. Sam looked  up out 
of the hollow.  The land  all about was  dreary, flat  and drab-hued. On the 
roads nearby nothing was moving now; but Sam feared the watchful eyes on 
the 
wall  of  the  Isenmouthe,  no  more   than   a   furlong   away  northward. 
South-eastward, far off like a  dark standing shadow. loomed  the  Mountain. 
Smokes  were  pouring from  it and while those that rose into  the upper air 
trailed away  eastward, great rolling clouds  floated  down  its  sides  and 
spread over the land. A  few miles to the north-east the  foothills  of  the 
Ashen  Mountains stood  like  sombre grey  ghosts, behind  which  the  misty 
northern heights rose  like  a line of distant cloud hardly darker than  the 
lowering sky. 
     Sam  tried to  guess the distances and to decide what way they ought to 
take.  It looks every step  of fifty miles,' he muttered gloomily staring at 
the threatening mountain, 'and that'll take a week, if it takes  a day, with 
Mr. Frodo as he is.' He shook his  head,  and as he worked things out, slowly  

####-a new dark thought  grew in his mind. Never  for long had  hope died in  his 
staunch  heart, and  always until now he  had  taken some thought  for their 
return.  But the  bitter  truth  came  home to him  at  last:  at best their 
provision  would take them to  their goal; and when the task was done, there 
they would come to  an end,  alone, houseless, foodless  in  the midst  of a  
terrible desert. There could be no return. 
     'So that was the job I felt I had to  do when  I started,' thought Sam: 
'to help  Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well, if that is 
the job then I must do it. But I would dearly like to see Bywater again, and 
Rosie Cotton and her brothers, and the Gaffer and Marigold  and all. I can't 
think somehow that Gandalf would have sent Mr. Frodo on this errand if there 
hadn't a' been  any hope  of his  ever coming back at all. Things  all  went 
wrong when  he went  down  in Moria.  I  wish he hadn't. He  would have done 
something.' 
     But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to  die, it was turned to a new 
strength. Sam's  plain  hobbit-face  grew stern,  almost  grim, as  the will 
hardened in him, and he felt through  all his  limbs a thrill,  as if he was 
turning into  some  creature  of   stone  and steel  that neither despair nor  
weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue. 
     With  a new sense of responsibility he  brought  his  eyes  back to the 
ground  near at hand, studying the  next move. As the light grew a little he 
saw  to  his  surprise  that  what  from  a  distance  had  seemed  wide and 
featureless  flats  were in fact  all broken  and tumbled. Indeed the  whole 
surface of the plains of Gorgoroth was pocked with great holes, as if, while 
it was still a waste of soft mud,  it had been smitten with a shower of bolts 
and huge slingstones. The largest of these holes  were rimmed with ridges of 
broken  rock, and broad fissures ran out from them in all directions. It was 
a land in which it would be possible to  creep from hiding to hiding, unseen 
by all but the most watchful eyes: possible at least for one  who was strong 
and had no need for speed. For the hungry and worn, who had far to go before 
life failed, it had an evil look. 
     Thinking  of all  these things Sam went back to his  master.  He had no 
need to rouse  him.  Frodo was lying on his  back with eyes open, staring at 
the  cloudy sky. 'Well, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'I've been having a look round 
and thinking a bit. There's  nothing on the roads, and we'd best  be getting 
away while there's a chance. Can you manage it?' 
     'I can manage it,' said Frodo. 'I must.' 

####-     Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, flitting behind 
such  cover  as they could find,  but moving always in  a slant towards  the 
foothills of the northern  range. But as they went the  most easterly of the 
roads followed them, until it ran  off, hugging the skirts of the mountains, 
away into a wall of black shadow far ahead. Neither  man  nor orc now  moved 
along its flat grey stretches; for the Dark Lord  had almost  completed  the 
movement of his forces, and even in the  fastness of his own realm he sought 
the secrecy of night, fearing the winds of the world that had turned against 
him, tearing aside his veils, and troubled with  tidings of  bold spies that 
had passed through his fences. 
     The hobbits had  gone a few weary  miles when they halted. Frodo seemed 
nearly  spent. Sam saw that he could not  go much further in  this  fashion, 
crawling, stooping, now picking  a doubtful way very slowly, now hurrying at 
a stumbling run. 
     'I'm  going  back on to the road while the light lasts, Mr.  Frodo,' he 
said. 'Trust to  luck again! It nearly failed us  last time,  but  it didn't 
quite. A steady pace for a few more miles, and then a rest.' 
     He was taking a far greater risk  than he knew; but  Frodo was too much 
occupied  with his burden and with the  struggle in  his mind to debate, and 
almost too hopeless  to care. They climbed  on to the  causeway and  trudged 
along, down the hard cruel road that led to the Dark Tower itself. But their 
luck held, and for the rest of that day they  met no living or moving thing; 
and when night fell they vanished into the darkness of Mordor. All  the land 
now brooded as at the coming of a  great storm: for the Captains of the West  
had passed  the Cross-roads and  set  flames  in  the deadly fields of Imlad 
Morgul. 
     So  the  desperate  journey  went  on, as the Ring went  south and  the 
banners of the  kings rode  north. For the hobbits each day,  each mile. was 
more  bitter than the one before, as  their  strength lessened and  the land 
became more  evil.  They met no enemies by day. At times  by night,  as they 
cowered or drowsed uneasily in some hiding beside the road, they heard cries 
and the  noise  of  many  feet or the swift passing of some  cruelly  ridden 
steed. But far  worse than all  such  perils was the ever -approaching threat 
that  beat  upon them as they went: the  dreadful menace of  the  Power that 
waited, brooding in  deep thought and sleepless malice behind  the dark veil  
about  its  Throne.  Nearer  and nearer it drew,  looming blacker, like  the 
oncoming of a wall of night at the last end of the world. 

####-     There  came at  last a dreadful nightfall; and even  as the Captains of 
the West drew near to the end of the living lands, the two wanderers came to  
an  hour of blank despair. Four days had passed since they had  escaped from 
the orcs,  but the  time lay behind  them like an ever -darkening  dream. All 
this  last  day Frodo  had not  spoken,  but had  walked  half-bowed,  often 
stumbling, as if his eyes no longer saw the way before his feet. Sam guessed 
that  among  all their  pains he  bore the worst, the growing weight  of the 
Ring, a  burden on  the  body and a torment  to his  mind. Anxiously Sam had 
noted  how his master's left hand would often be raised  as if to ward  on a  
blow,  or to  screen his shrinking eyes from a dreadful  Eye that sought  to 
look  in them.  And sometimes  his right  hand  would creep  to  his breast, 
clutching, and  then  slowly,  as  the will recovered mastery, it  would  be 
withdrawn. 
     Now as the blackness of night  returned Frodo sat, his head between his 
knees, his arms  hanging wearily  to the ground where  his hands lay  feebly  
twitching. Sam watched him, till  night covered them both and hid them  from 
one another. He could no longer find any words to say;  and he turned to his 
own dark thoughts. As for himself, though weary and under a  shadow of fear, 
he still  had some strength left. The lembas had a virtue without which they 
would  long  ago have  lain down to die. It did  not satisfy desire, and  at 
times Sam's mind  was filled with the memories of food, and the  longing for 
simple  bread  and meats.  And yet this waybread of the  Elves had a potency 
that increased as travellers  relied on it alone and did  not mingle it with 
other foods. It fed the will, and  it gave strength to endure, and to master  
sinew  and limb beyond the measure of mortal  kind. But  now a  new decision 
must be  made. They could not follow  this road any  longer; for  it went on 
eastward  into  the  great Shadow, but the Mountain  now  loomed  upon their 
right, almost due south, and they must turn towards it. Yet  still before it 
there stretched a wide region of fuming, barren, ash-ridden land. 
     'Water, water!'  muttered  Sam.  He had  stinted  himself,  and in  his 
parched mouth his tongue seemed thick and swollen; but for all his care they  
now  had  very little left, perhaps half  his bottle, and  maybe there  were 
still days to go.  All would long ago have been spent, if they had not dared 
to follow the  orc-road. For at long intervals on that highway  cisterns had 
been built  for  the use  of troops  sent in  haste  through  the  waterless 
regions. In one  Sam had found some water left, stale, muddied by  the orcs,  
but still sufficient  for their desperate case. Yet that was now a  day ago. 

####-There was no hope of any more. 
     At last  wearied with his cares Sam drowsed, leaving the morrow till it 
came; he could do no more. Dream and waking mingled uneasily. He saw  
lights 
like gloating yes, and dark creeping shapes, and he heard noises as of  wild 
beasts  or  the dreadful cries of tortured things; and he would start  up to 
find the world all dark and only  empty b lackness all about him. Once  only,  
as he stood and stared wildly round,  did it seem that, though now awake, he 
could still see pale lights like eyes; but soon they flickered and vanished. 
     The hateful night  passed  slowly  and  reluctantly. Such  da ylight  as 
followed was dim; for here as the Mountain drew near the air was ever mirky, 
while  out  from the Dark Tower  there crept the veils of Shadow that Sauron 
wove about himself. Frodo was lying on his back not moving. Sam stood 
beside 
him, reluctant  to speak, and yet knowing that the word now lay with him:  he 
must set his  master's will to work for another effort. At  length, stooping 
and caressing Frodo's brow, he spoke in his ear. 
     'Wake up, Master!' he said. 'Time for another start.' 
     As   if roused by a sudden  bell,  Frodo rose quickly,  and stood up and 
looked away southwards; but when his eyes beheld the Mountain and the desert 
he quailed again. 
     'I can't manage it, Sam,' he said. 'It is such a weight to carry,  such 
a weight.' 
     Sam knew before he spoke, that  it was vain, and that  such words might 
do more harm than good, but in his pity he could not  keep silent. 'Then let 
me carry it a bit  for you, Master,' he said. 'You know I would, and gladly, 
as long as I have any strength. ' 
     A wild light came  into Frodo's  eyes. 'Stand away! Don't touch me!' he 
cried. 'It is mine,  I say. Be off!' His hand strayed to his sword-hilt. But 
then quickly his voice changed.  'No, no,  Sam,' he said sadly.  'But you must  
understand. It is my   burden,  and no  one  else can bear it. It is too late 
now, Sam dear. You can't help me in that way again. I am almost in its power  
now. I could not give it up, and if you tried to take it I should go mad.' 
     Sam  nodded. 'I understand,'  he  said.  'But  I've been thinking,  Mr. 
Frodo, there's other things we might do without. Why not lighten  the load a  
bit? We're going that way now, as straight as we can make it.' He pointed to  
the Mountain. 'It's no good taking anything we're not sure to need.' 

####-     Frodo looked again towards the Mountain. 'No,' he said, 'we shan't need 
much on that road.  And  at its  end  nothing.' Picking up his orc-shield he 
flung it away and threw his helmet after it. Then pulling off the grey cloak 
he undid  the  heavy  belt and let it fall to the ground,  and  the sheathed 
sword with it. The shreds of the black cloak he tore off and scattered. 
     'There, I'll be  an orc  no more,' he  cried, 'and  I'll bear no weapon 
fair or foul. Let them take me, if they will!' 
     Sam did likewise, and put aside his  orc-gear; and he took  out all the 
things  in  his pack.  Somehow  each of them had become dear to him, if only 
because he had borne them so far with so much toil. Hardest of all it was to 
part with  his cooking-gear.  Tears welled in  his eyes  at  the thought  of 
casting it away. 
     'Do you  remember that  bit  of  rabbit, Mr. Frodo?' he  said. 'And our 
place under the warm bank in  Captain  Faramir's  country, the  day I saw an 
oliphaunt?' 
     'No, I  am afraid not,  Sam, '  said Frodo. 'At  least, I know that such 
things happened,  but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of water, 
no sound of wind,  no memory of tree or grass or flower, no image of moon or  
star  are left to me. I am  naked in  the  dark.  Sam, and there is  no veil 
between me  and  the wheel  of fire. I begin to see  it even  with my waking 
eyes, and all else fades.' 
     Sam went  to him and kissed his hand. 'Then the sooner we're rid of it, 
the sooner  to rest,'  he said  haltingly, finding no  better  words to say. 
'Talking won't mend nothing,' he muttered to himself,  as he gathered up all 
the  things  that they had chosen to cast away. He was  not willing to leave 
them lying open in the wilderness  for any eyes  to see. 'Stinker picked  up 
that  orc-shirt,  seemingly,  and he  isn't going to add a sword  to it. His 
hands are bad enough when  empty. And he isn't going to mess  with my pans!' 
With  that he carried all  the gear away to  one of the many gaping fissures 
that scored  the land and thr ew them in. The clatter of his precious pans as 
they fell down into the dark was like a death-knell to his heart. 
     He came back to Frodo, and then of his elven -rope he  cut a short piece 
to  serve his master  as a girdle and bind  the grey cloak close  about  his 
waist. The rest he carefully coiled and put back in his pack. Beside that he 
kept  only the remnants of  their waybread  and the  water -bottle, and Sting 
still hanging by his belt; and hidden away in a pocket of his tunic next his 
breast the ph ial of Galadriel and the  little box that  she gave him for his 

####-own. 
     Now  at  last  they turned  their faces to  the Mountain  and  set out, 
thinking no more of concealment,  bending  their weariness and failing wills 
only  to the  one task of going on. In  the dimness  of  its dreary day  few 
things even  in  that land  of  vigilance could have espied them, save  from 
close  at hand. Of all the slaves of  the  Dark  Lord, only the Nazgyl could 
have warned him of the  peril  that crept, small  but  indomitable, into the 
very  heart of his  guarded realm. But the Nazgyl and their black wings were 
abroad on another errand: they  were  gathered far away, shadowing the march 
of  the Captains of the West, and thither the  thought of the Dark Tower was 
turned . 
     That day it seemed to Sam that his master  had found some new strength,  
more than could be explained by the small lightening of the load that he had 
to carry.  In  the first marches they  went  further and faster than he  had 
hoped. The land was rough  and hostile, and yet they made much progress, and 
ever the Mountain drew nearer.  But as the  day wore on and all too soon the  
dim light began to fail,  Frodo stooped again, and  began to stagger, as  if 
the renewed effort had squandered his remaining strength. 
     At  their last halt he sank down and said: 'I'm thirsty,  Sam,' and did 
not speak  again. Sam gave him  a mouthful  of water; only one more mouthful 
remained. He went without himself; and now as once more the  night of 
Mordor  
closed over  them, through all his thoughts there came  the memory of water; 
and every brook  or  stream or fount  that he  had  ever  seen, under  green 
willow-shades or twinkling in  the sun, danced  and rippled for his  torment 
behind the blindness of his eyes. He felt the cool mud about his toes  as he 
paddled in the Pool at Bywater with Jolly Cotton and Tom and Nibs, and their 
sister  Rosie. 'But that was years  ago,'  he sighed, 'and far away. The way 
back, if there is one, goes past the Mountain.' 
     He could not sleep and he held a  debate with himself. 'Well, come now,  
we've done better than you hoped,' he said sturdily.  'Began  well anyway. I 
reckon we  crossed half the distance before we stopped. One more day will do 
it.' And then he paused. 
     'Don't  be a  fool, Sam Gamgee,' came  an answer  in  his own voice. 'He 
won't go another day like that, if he moves at all. And you can't go on much  
longer giving him all the water and most of the food.' 
     'I can go on a good way though, and I will.' 

####-     'Where to? ' 
     'To the Mountain, of course.' 
     'But what then, Sam Gamgee, what then? When you get there, what are you  
going to do? He won't be able to do anything for himself.' 
     To his dismay Sam realized that he  had not  got an answer  to this. He 
had no clear idea  at all. Frodo  had not spoken much to him  of his errand, 
and Sam only knew vaguely that the Ring had somehow to be put into the fire. 
'The Cracks of  Doom,' he muttered, the old name rising  to his mind. 'Well, 
if Master knows how to find them, I don't.' 
     'There you are!' came the answer. 'It's  all quite useless.  He said so 
himself. You are the fool, going on hoping and  toiling. You could have lain 
down and gone to sleep  together days ago, if you hadn't been so dogged. But 
you'll die just the same, or worse. You might just as well lie down  now and 
give it up. You'll never get to the top anyway.' 
     'I'll get there, if  I leave everything but my bones behind,' said Sam. 
'And I'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart. So stop 
arguing!' 
     At  that moment Sam felt a  tremor in the  ground  beneath  him, and he 
heard or  sensed a deep remote rumble as  of  thunder  imprisoned  under the  
earth. There was a brief  red flame that flickered under the clouds and died 
away. The Mountain too slept uneasily. 
     The last stage of their journey to  Orodruin came, and it was a torment 
greater than Sam had ever thought that he could bear. He was in pain, and so  
parched that he could no longer swallow even a mouthful of food. It remained 
dark, not  only because of the  smokes of the Mountain: there seemed to be a  
storm  coming  up,  and  away  to  the  south-east there  was  a  shimmer of 
lightnings under the black skies. Worst of all,  the air  was full of fumes;  
breathing was painful and difficult, and  a dizziness  came on them, so that 
they staggered and often fell. And  yet their wills did not  yield, and they 
struggled on. 
     The  Mountain crept  up ever nearer, until, if they  lifted their heavy 
heads, it  filled all  their sight, looming vast before them: a huge mass of 
ash  and slag and burned stone, out  of which a  sheer -sided cone was raised 
into  the clouds. Before the  daylong dusk ended and true  night  came again 
they had crawled and stumbled to its very feet. 
     With a gasp  Frodo cast  himself on  the ground. Sam sat by him. To his 
surprise he felt tired but lighter, and his head seemed clear again. No more 

####-debates disturbed  his mind.  He knew all the arguments of despair and would 
not listen to them. His wi ll was set, and only death would break it. He felt 
no longer either desire  or need of sleep, but  rather  of  watchfulness. He 
knew  that all the hazards and perils were now  drawing together to a point: 
the next day would  be a day of doom, the day  of final  effort or disaster, 
the last gasp. 
     But when  would it come? The night seemed endless and  timeless, minute 
after  minute  falling dead and adding up to  no  passing hour,  bringing no 
change. Sam  began to wonder if a second darkness had begun and no day 
would 
ever  reappear. At  last he  groped  for  Frodo's  hand.  It  was  cold  and 
trembling. His master was shivering. 
     'I  didn't ought  to have left  my blanket  behind,' muttered Sam;  and 
lying down he tried to comfort Frodo with his arms and body. Then sleep took  
him,  and the dim light of  the last day of  their  quest found them side by 
side. The wind  had fallen  the day before  as it shifted from the West, and 
now  it came from the North  and began  to rise; and slowly the light of the 
unseen Sun filtered down into the shadows where the hobbits lay. 
     'Now for it! Now  for the last  gasp!' said Sam as he  struggled to his 
feet.  He bent over Frodo, rousing  him gently.  Frodo groaned; but  with  a  
great effort of will he staggered up; and then he fell upon his knees again.  
He raised his eyes with difficulty to the dark slopes of Mount Doom towering 
above him, and then pitifully he began to crawl forward on his hands.  
     Sam looked at him and wept in his heart, but  no tears came to his  dry 
and stinging eyes. 'I said I'd carry him, if it broke my back,' he muttered, 
'and I will!' 
     'Come, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I can't carry it for you, but I can carry 
you and  it as well.  So  up you get! Come on, Mr. Frodo dear! Sam will give 
you a ride. Just tell him where to go, and he'll go.' 
     As Frodo clung upon his back, arms loosely about his neck, legs clasped 
firmly under his arms, Sam staggered to his  feet; and then to his amazement  
he felt the  burden light. He had feared that he would  have barely strength 
to lift  his  master alone, and beyond that he had expected to share in  the 
dreadful dragging weight of the  accursed  Ring.  But it was not so. Whether  
because Frodo  was so worn by his  long pains, wound  of knife, and venomous 
sting,  and  sorrow, fear, and homeless wandering, or  because some  gift of 
final  strength was given to  him, Sam lifted Frodo with no more  difficulty 

####-than if he were carrying a hobbit-child pig-a -back in some romp on the lawns 
or hayfields of the Shire. He took a deep breath and started off. 
     They had reached the Mountain's foot on its northern side, and a little 
to the westward; there its long grey  slopes, though broken, were not sheer. 
Frodo did  not speak,  and so Sam  struggled on as best he could, having  no  
guidance but the will to climb as high as might be  before his strength gave 
out  and his will broke. On he toiled, up and up, turning this way and  that 
to lessen  the slope, often stumbling forward, and at the last crawling like 
a snail  with  a  heavy burden on its back. When his will could drive him no 
further, and his limbs gave way, he stopped and laid his master gently down.  
     Frodo opened his eyes and  drew a breath.  It was easier  to breathe up 
here  above the reeks that coiled and drifted down below. 'Thank you,  Sam,' 
he said in a cracked whisper. 'How far is there to go?' 
     'I don't know,' said Sam, 'because I don't know where we're going.' 
     He looked back, and then he looked up; and he was amazed to see how far 
his last effort had brought him. The Mountain standing ominous and alone had 
looked taller than it was. Sam saw  now that it was less lofty than the high 
passes of the Ephel D®ath which  he and Frodo had  scaled. The  confused and 
tumbled shoulders of its great base rose for maybe three thousand feet above  
the plain,  and above them was  reared half as  high again its  tall central 
cone, like a vast oast  or chimney capped with a jagged  crater. But already 
Sam was  more than half way up  the base, and the pla in of Gorgoroth was dim 
below him, wrapped in fume and shadow. As he looked up he would have 
given a  
shout. if his parched throat had allowed him; for amid the rugged humps  and 
shoulders above him he saw plainly a path or road.  It climbed like a rising 
girdle from the west and wound snakelike about the Mountain, until before it 
went  round out of  view it reached the foot  of the  cone upon its  eastern 
side. 
     Sam could  not see  the course  immediately above  him,  where  it  was 
lowest, for a steep slope went up from where he stood; but  he  guessed that 
if he could only struggle on just a little way further up, they would strike 
this path. A gleam of hope returned to  him. They might conquer the Mountain 
yet. 'Why, it might have  been put there a -purpose!' he said to himself. 'If 
it wasn't there, I'd have to say I was beaten in the end.' 
     The path was not put there for the purposes of Sam. He did not know it, 
but he was looking at Sauron's Road  from Barad-dyr to the Sammath Naur, the 

####-Chambers of Fire. Out from the Dark Tower's huge western gate it came over a  
deep abyss by a vast bridge of iron, and then passing  into the plain it ran 
for a league between  two smoking  chasms,  and so  reached  a  long sloping 
causeway that led up on to the Mountain's eastern side.  Thence, turning and  
encircling all  its wide girth from south to north, it climbed at last, high 
in the upper cone, but still far from the reeking summit, to a dark entrance 
that  gazed back  east  straight  to  the  Window  of  the  Eye  in Sauron's 
shadow-mantled fortress. Often blocked  or destroyed by  the tumults  of the 
Mountain's furnaces, always  that road was repaired and cleaned again by the 
labours of countless orcs.  
     Sam drew a deep breath. There was a path, but how he was to get  up the 
slope to it he did not know. First he must ease his aching back. He lay flat 
beside Frodo for a  while. Neither spoke. Slowly the light  grew. Suddenly a  
sense of urgency which  he did not understand  came to Sam. It was almost as 
if he had been called: 'Now, now, or it will be too late!' He braced himself 
and  got up. Frodo also seemed to have felt  the  call. He struggled to  his 
knees. 
     'I'll crawl, Sam,' he gasped. 
     So foot by foot, like small grey insects, they crept up the sl ope. They 
came to the path and found  that it was broad, paved with broken rubble  and  
beaten  ash.  Frodo clambered on  to  it,  and  then  moved  as  if by  some 
compulsion he turned slowly to face  the East. Far off the shadows of Sauron 
hung; but  torn by some gust of wind out of the world, or else moved by some 
great  disquiet within,  the mantling  clouds swirled, and for a moment drew 
aside; and  then he saw,  rising  black,  blacker and  darker than  the vast  
shades  amid which it  stood,  the  cruel pinnacles  and  iron  crown of the 
topmost tower of Barad-dyr. One moment  only it stared out, but as from some 
great window immeasurably high there stabbed northward  a  flame of red, the 
flicker of  a piercing Eye;  and then the shadows were furled  again and the 
terrible vision was removed. The Eye was not  turned to them:  it was gazing 
north to where the Captains of  the West  stood at bay, and thither  all its 
malice was now bent, as the Power moved to strike its deadly blow; but Frodo 
at that dreadful glimpse fell as  one stricken mortally. His hand sought the 
chain about his neck. 
     Sam knelt  by him. Faint, almost  inaudibly, he heard Frodo whispering: 
'Help me, Sam! Help me, Sam! Hold  my hand! I can't  stop it.' Sam took  his 
master's hands a nd laid  them together, palm to  palm, and kissed them;  and  

####-then he held them gently  between his own. The thought came suddenly to him: 
'He's spotted us! It's all  up, or it soon will be. Now, Sam Gamgee, this is 
the end of ends.' 
     Again  he  lifted Frodo  and drew  his  hands down to  his  own breast. 
letting his master's legs  dangle. Then he bowed his  head and struggled off 
along the climbing road. It was  not as easy a way to take as it had  looked 
at first.  By fortune the fires that had poured  forth in the great  turmoils 
when Sam stood upon  Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern 
and 
western slopes,  and the road  on  this  side  was not blocked.  Yet in many 
places it had crumbled  away or was crossed  by gaping rents. After climbing 
eastward for some time it bent back upon itself at a sharp  angle  and  went 
westward fox  a space. There at the bend it  was  cut deep through a crag of 
old weathered  stone once long  ago vomited  from the  Mountain's  furnaces. 
Panting under his load Sam turned the bend;  and even  as he did  so, out of 
the corner of his  eye, he had a glimpse of something falling from the crag, 
like a small piece of black stone that had toppled off as he passed. 
     A sudden weight smote him and he crashed forward, tearing the backs  of 
his hands that still clasped his master's. Then  he knew what had  happened,  
for above him as he lay he heard a hated voice. 
     'Wicked masster!' it hissed. 'Wicked masster cheats us; cheats Smjagol, 
gollum. He musstn't go that  wa y. He  musstn't hurt  Preciouss. Give  it  to 
Smjagol, yess, give it to us! Give it to uss!' 
     With a  violent heave Sam rose up.  At once  he drew his  sword; but he 
could do nothing.  Gollum and Frodo were locked together. Gollum was tearing 
at  his master,  trying to  get at the chain and the Ring. This was probably 
the only thing  that could have roused the dying embers of Frodo's heart and  
will:  an  attack,  an attempt to wrest his  treasure from him by force.  He 
fought back with a sudden  fury  that  amazed Sam, and Gollum  also. Even so 
things  might have  gone far  otherwise,  if  Gollum  himself  had  remained 
unchanged;  but whatever dreadful paths, lonely and hungry and waterless, he 
had trodden, driven by a devouring desire and a terrible fear, they had left  
grievous marks on him. He was a lean, starved, haggard thing, all  bones and 
tight-drawn sallow skin. A wild light flamed in his eyes, but his malice was 
no longer matched by his old griping strength. Frodo flung him off and  rose 
up quivering. 
     'Down,  down!' he gasped,  clutching his hand  to his  breast,  so that 

####-beneath  the cover  of his  leather shirt  he clasped  the Ring.  'Down  you  
creeping  thing,  and out of  my path!  Your time is at an  end.  You cannot 
betray me or slay me now.' 
     Then  suddenly, as  before under the eaves of the  Emyn Muil,  Sam  saw 
these  two rivals  with other vision. A crouching shape, scarcely  more than 
the shadow of a living thing, a creature now wholly ruined and defeated, yet  
filled with a hideous lust and rage; and before it stood stern,  untouchable 
now by pity, a figure robed  in white, but at its breast it held a  wheel of 
fire. Out of the fire there spoke a commanding voice. 
     'Begone, and trouble me no more! If you touch me ever again,  you shall  
be cast yourself into the Fire of Doom.' 
     The crouching  shape  backed away, terror in its blinking eyes, and yet 
at the same time insatiable desire. 
     Then the vision  passed and Sam saw Frodo standing, hand on breast, his 
breath coming in great gasps,  and Gollum at his feet, resting  on his knees 
with his wide-splayed hands upon the ground. 
     'Look  out!' cried Sam. 'He'll spring!' He stepped forward, brandishing 
his  sword. 'Quick, Master!' he gasped. 'Go on! Go on! No time to lose. I'll 
deal with him. Go on!' 
     Frodo looked at him as if at one now far away. 'Yes, I must  go on,' he 
said. 'Farewell, Sam!  This is the  end at last.  On  Mount  Doom doom shall 
fall. Farewell!'  He  turned and went on,  walking slowly  but  erect u p the 
climbing path. 
     'Now!' said Sam. 'At last  I can deal with you!' He leaped forward with 
drawn blade ready for battle. But  Gollum did not spring. He fell  flat upon 
the ground and whimpered. 
     'Don't kill us,'  he wept. 'Don't hurt us with  na ssty cruel steel! Let 
us live,  yes,  live just a little longer. Lost lost!  We're lost. And  when 
Precious goes we'll die, yes, die into the  dust.' He clawed up the ashes of 
the path with his long fleshless fingers.  'Dusst!' he hissed. 
     Sam's hand wa vered. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil. 
It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, just and many 
times deserved;  and also it  seemed the  only safe thing to do. But deep in 
his heart there was something that restrained him: he could not strike  this 
thing  lying  in the  dust, forlorn, ruinous,  utterly wretched. He himself, 
though only for a little while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed 
the  agony of  Gollum's  shrivelled  mind and body,  enslaved to tha t  Ring, 

####-unable  to find peace or relief ever in  life again. But Sam had no words to 
express what he felt. 
     'Oh, curse you, you stinking thing!' he said. 'Go away! Be off! I don't  
trust you, not as far as I could kick you; but be off. Or I  shall hurt you, 
yes, with nasty cruel steel.' 
     Gollum got up on all fours, and backed away for several paces, and then 
he turned, and as  Sam aimed a kick at him  he fled away down the  path. Sam 
gave no  more heed  to him. He suddenly remembered his master. He looked  
up 
the  path and could not see him. As fast as he could he trudged up the road. 
If he had looked back, he might have seen  not  far below Gollum turn again, 
and then with a wild light of madness glaring in his eyes come,  swiftly but 
warily, creeping on behind, a slinking shadow among the stones.  
     The  path climbed on.  Soon  it bent again  and. with a  last  eastward 
course passed in a cutting along the face of the  cone  and came to the dark 
door in the Mountain's side, the door  of the  Samma th  Naur. Far  away  now 
rising  towards  the  South the  sun, piercing  the  smokes and haze, burned 
ominous, a dull  bleared  disc of red; but all Mordor lay about the Mountain  
like a dead land, silent, shadow-folded, waiting for some dreadful stroke. 
     Sam came to the gaping mouth and peered in. It was dark and  hot, and a  
deep rumbling shook the  air.  'Frodo!  Master!'  he  called. There  was  no 
answer. For a  moment he stood, his heart beating with wild fears,  and then  
he plunged in. A shadow followed him. 
     At first he could see nothing. In his great need he drew  out once more 
the phial of Galadriel, but it  was pale and cold in  his trembling hand and 
threw no light  into that stifling  dark. He was come  to the  heart of  the 
realm  of  Sauron  and  the  forges  of  his   ancient  might,  greatest  in 
Middle-earth;  all other powers  were here  subdued. Fearfully he took a few 
uncertain steps in the dark, and then all at once there came a  flash of red 
that leaped upward, and smote the high black roof. Then Sam saw  that he was 
in a long cave or tunnel that bored into the  Mountain's  smoking cone.  But 
only a short way ahead its floor and the walls on either side were cloven by 
a great fissure, out of which the  red glare came, now leaping u p, now dying 
down  into  darkness; and all the while  far  below there was a rumour and a  
trouble as of great engines throbbing and labouring. 
     The light sprang up  again, and there on the brink of the chasm, at the 
very Crack of Doom, stood Frodo,  black against the glare, tense, erect, but 

####-still as if he had been turned to stone. 
     'Master!' cried Sam. 
     Then Frodo stirred  and  spoke with a  clear voice, indeed with a voice 
clearer and more powerful than Sam had ever heard him use, and it rose above 
the throb and turmoil of Mount Doom, ringing in the roof and walls.  
     'I have come,' he said. 'But I  do not choose now to do what I  came to 
do. I will not do this  deed. The Ring is mine!' And suddenly, as he set  it 
on  his finger,  he  vanished  from Sam's sight.  Sam gasped,  but he had no 
chance to cry out, for at that moment many things happened. 
     Something struck Sam violently in the back,  his legs were knocked from 
under him and he was flung aside, striking his head against the stony  floor, 
as a dark shape sprang  over him. He  lay still  and for a  moment  all went 
black. 
     And far away, as Frodo put on the Ring and claimed it for his own, even 
in  Sammath Naur the  very heart  of his realm, the Power  in  Barad-dyr was 
shaken, and  the Tower trembled from its foundations to its  proud and bitter  
crown.  The  Dark Lord was suddenly  aware of him, and  his Eye piercing all 
shadows  looked  across the plain to  the door  that he had  made;  and  the 
magnitude of  his own folly was revealed to him in a blinding flash, and all 
the devices of his enemies were at last laid bare.  Then his wrath blazed in 
consuming flame, but his fear rose like a vast black smoke to choke him. For 
he knew his deadly peril and the thread upon which his doom now hung. 
     From all his policies and  webs of  fear  and treachery, from  all  his 
stratagems and wars his mind shook  free; and throughout his realm  a tremor 
ran, his slaves quailed, and his armies  halted,  and his captains  suddenly 
steerless,  bereft of will, wavered and  despaired. For they were forgotten. 
The whole mind and purpose of the Power that wielded them was now bent  
with 
overwhelming  force  upon  the Mountain.  At his  summons,  wheeling with  a  
rending cry, in a last desperate race there flew, faster than the winds, the 
Nazgyl the Ringwraiths, and with a storm of wings they hurtled southwards to 
Mount Doom. 
     Sam got up. He was dazed,  and blood streaming from his head dripped in 
his eyes. He groped  forward, and then  he saw a strange and terrible thing. 
Gollum on the edge of the abyss was fighting like a mad thing with an unseen 
foe. To and fro he swayed, now  so near the brink that almost he tumbled in, 
now dragging back, falling to the ground, rising, and falling again. And all 

####-the while he hissed but spoke no words. 
     The fires below  awoke in  anger,  the  red  light  blazed, and all the 
cavern was  filled with  a great glare  and heat. Suddenly  Sam saw Gollum's 
long hands  draw  upwards  to  his mouth; his white fangs gleamed,  and then 
snapped as  they bit. Frodo  gave a cry, and there he was, fallen  upon  his 
knees at the chasm's edge. But Gollum, dancing  like a mad thing, held aloft  
the ring, a finger still thrust within its circle. It shone now as if verily 
it was wrought of living fire. 
     'Precious,  precious,  precious!'  Gollum  cried. 'My  Precious!  O  my 
Precious!'  And with that, even as his eyes were lifted  up to gloat  on his 
prize, he  stepped  too far, toppled, wavered for a moment on the brink, and 
then  with a shriek he fell. Out of the depths came  his last wail Precious, 
and he was gone. 
     There was a roar  and a great confusion  of noise. Fires leaped  up and 
licked the  roof.  The throbbing  grew to a great tumult,  and the  Mountain 
shook. Sam ran to Frodo and picked him up and carried him. out to the  door. 
And there upon the dark threshold of the Sammath Naur, high above the plains 
of Mordor, such wonder and terror came on him that he stood still forgetting 
all else, and gazed as one turned to st one. 
     A brief vision he had of  swirling cloud, and in the midst of it towers 
and battlements, tall as  hills, founded upon a mighty mountain-throne above 
immeasurable pits;  great  courts and  dungeons, eyeless  prisons  sheer  as 
cliffs, and gaping gates of steel and adamant: and then  all passed.  Towers 
fell  and  mountains slid;  walls crumbled and melted,  crashing down;  vast 
spires  of  smoke and  spouting  steams  went  billowing  up, up, until they 
toppled  like  an overwhelming  wave, and  its  wild  crest  curled and came 
foaming down  upon the land. And then at last  over  the miles between there 
came a rumble, rising to a deafening  crash  and roar;  the earth shook, the 
plain heaved and  cracked, and Orodruin reeled. Fire belched from its   riven 
summit.  The  skies  burst  into  thunder seared  with lightning. Down  like 
lashing whips fell a torrent of black rain. And into the heart of the storm, 
with a cry that pierced all  other  sounds, tearing the clouds asunder,  the 
Nazgyl came, shooting  like  flaming bolts, as  caught in the  fiery ruin of 
hill and sky they crackled, withered, and went out. 
     'Well,  this  is the end, Sam Gamgee,'  said a  voice by his side.  And 
there was Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his eyes there 
was peace now, neither strain of will, nor madness, nor any fear. His burden 

####-was taken away. There was the dear master of the sweet days in the Shire. 
     'Master!' cried  Sam. and fell upon his knees. In all that ruin  of the 
world for the momen t he  felt only joy, great joy. The burden  was gone. His 
master had  been  saved;  he was  himself again, he was free. And  then  Sam 
caught sight of the maimed and bleeding hand. 
     'Your poor hand!'  he said.  'And I have nothing to  bind it  with,  or 
comfort it.  I would have  spared him  a whole hand of mine rather. But he's 
gone now beyond recall, gone for ever.' 
     'Yes,'  said Frodo. 'But do  you remember Gandalf's words: Even  Gollum 
may  have something  yet to do? But for him, Sam, I could not have destroyed 
the Ring. The Quest would  have been in vain, even at the bitter end. So let 
us forgive  him!  For the Quest  is achieved, and now all is over. I am glad 
you are here with me. Here at the end of all things, Sam.' 

####- 
 

Chapter 4. The Field of Cormallen 

 
 
     All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged. The Captains of the West  
were foundering in a gathering sea. The sun gleamed red, and under the wings 
of the Nazgyl  the shadows of death fell dark upon the earth. Aragorn  stood 
beneath his  banner,  silent and stern, as one lost in thought of things long 
past or far away; but his eyes gleamed like stars that shine the brighter as 
the  night deepens.  Upon the hill-top stood Gandalf,  and  he was white and 
cold and no shadow fell on him. The onslaught of Mordor broke like a wave on 
the beleaguered hills,  voices roaring like a tide amid the  wreck and crash 
of arms.  
     As  if to his eyes some sudden vision had  been given, Gandalf stirred; 
and  he turned, looking back north where the skies were pale and clear. Then 
he lifted up his hands and cried in  a loud voice ringing above the din: The 
Eagles are coming! And many voices answered crying:  The  Eagles are 
coming! 
The Eagles are  coming! The hosts of Mordor looked up and wondered what 
this 
sign might mean. 
     There came Gwaihir the Windlord, and Landroval his brother, greatest of  
all the Eagles of  the North, mightiest of the descendants of old Thorondor, 
who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the  Encircling  Mountains 
when Middle-earth was young. Behind  them in long swift lines came all their 
vassals  from the northern mountains, speeding on a gathering wind. Straight 
down  upon the Nazgyl they bore, stooping suddenly out of the high airs, and 
the rush of their wide wings as they passed over was like a gale. 
     But the  Nazgyl  turned and  fled, and vanished into  Mordor's shadows, 
hearing  a sudden terrible  call  out of the  Dark Tower; and  even  at that 
moment  all the hosts of Mordor trembled, doubt clutched their hearts,  their 
laughter  failed, their hands shook  and their limbs were loosed.  The Power  
that drove them on and filled them with hate and fury was wavering, its will  
was removed from them; and now looking in the eyes of their enemies they 
saw 
a deadly light and were afraid. 

####-     Then all the Captains  of  the West cried aloud, for their hearts  were 
filled  with a  new hope in the midst of darkness. Out  from the beleaguered 
hills   knights  of   Gondor,  Riders  of  Rohan,  D®nedain  of  the  North, 
close-serried  companies, drove against  their wavering  foes, piercing  the 
press with the thrust of bitter spears. But  Gandalf lifted up his arms  and 
called once more in a clear voice: 
     'Stand, Men of the West! Stand and wait! This is the hour of doom.' 
     And even  as he spoke  the earth rocked beneath their feet. Then rising 
swiftly  up,  far  above the  Towers  of  the  Black  Gate, high  above  the 
mountains,  a vast soaring  darkness  sprang into the sky,  flickering  with 
fire. The  earth  groaned  and quaked.  The  Towers  of  the  Teeth  swayed, 
tottered, and fell down; the mighty rampart  crumbled;  the Black  Gate  was 
hurled in ruin; and from far away, now dim, now growing, now mounting to 
the 
clouds, there came a drumming rumble, a roar, a long echoing roll of ruinous 
noise. 
     'The  realm of  Sauron is ended!'  said  Gandalf.  'The Ring-bearer has 
fulfilled his Quest.' And as the Captains gazed south to the Land of Mordor, 
it seemed to them that, black  against  the pall of cloud, there rose a huge 
shape of shadow,  impenetrable,  lightning-crowned,  filling  all  the  sky. 
Enormous it reared above the world,  and stretched  out towards  them a vast  
threatening hand, terrible but  impotent: for even as it leaned over them, a  
great wind took it, and  it was  all blown away, and passed; and then a hush 
fell. 
     The Captains  bowed their heads; and when they looked up again, behold! 
their enemies were flying and  the power of Mordor was scattering  like dust  
in the wind. As when death  smites the swollen brooding thing  that inhabits 
their crawling hill and holds them all in sway, ants will wander witless and 
purposeless and then feebly die, so the creatures of Sauron, orc or troll or  
beast  spell-enslaved,  ran  hither  and  thither  mindless;  and  some slew 
themselves, or  cast themselves  in pits,  or  fled wailing  back to hide in 
holes and dark lightless  places far  from hope. But the Men of  Rhyn and of 
Harad, Easterling and  Southron, saw  the ruin of their war  and  the  great 
majesty and glory  of the Captains of the West. And those  that were deepest  
and longest in evil servitude,  hating the West, and yet were men  proud and 
bold,  in their turn now gathered  themselves for a  last stand of desperate 
battle. But the most part fled eastward  as  they could; and some cast their  

####-weapons down and sued for mercy. 
     Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn 
and the  other  lords, stood  upon the hill-top  and called; and down to him 
came the great eagle, Gwaihir  the Windlord, and stood before him. 
     'Twice you have  borne me,  Gwaihir my friend,'  said  Gandalf. 'Thrice 
shall pay for all, if you  are willing. You will  not find  me a burden much 
greater than when  you bore me from  Zirak-zigil, where  my  old life burned 
away.' 
     'I would  bear you,' answered Gwaihir, 'whither you will, even were you  
made of stone.' 
     'Then  come, and let your  brother go with us,  and some other of  your 
folk who is most  swift! For we have need of  speed greater than  any  wind,  
outmatching the wings of the Nazgyl.' 
     'The North  Wind blows, but we  shall outfly it,' said Gwaihir. And  he 
lifted up Gandalf and  sped away south, and  with  him  went Landroval,  and 
Meneldor young and swift. And they passed over  Udyn and  Gorgoroth  and 
saw 
all  the land in  ruin and tumult  beneath them, and before them Mount  Doom 
blazing, pouring out its fire. 
     'I am glad that you are here with me,' said Frodo. 'Here at the end  of 
all things, Sam.' 
     'Yes, I  am with  you, Master,' said Sam, laying  Frodo's  wounded hand 
gently to his breast. 'And you're with me.  And  the journey's finished. But 
after  coming all that way I don't  want to give  up  yet. It's not like me, 
somehow, if you understand.' 
     'Maybe not, Sam,' said Frodo; 'but  it's like things  are in the world. 
Hopes fail. An end comes.  We have only  a little  time to wait  now. We are 
lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.' 
     'Well,  Master, we could at  least go further from this dangerous place 
here, from this Crack of Doom,  if  that's its name. Now couldn't  we? Come, 
Mr. Frodo, let's go down the path at any rate!' 
     'Very  well,  Sam. If you wish to go, I'll come,' said  Frodo; and they 
rose and went slowly down the  winding road; and even as they passed towards 
the  Mountain's  quaking  feet, a  great smoke and steam  belched  from  the 
Sammath Naur, and the side  of  the cone was riven open,  and  a  huge fiery 
vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down the eastern mountain-side. 
     Frodo and Sam could go no further. Their last strength of mind and body 

####-was  swiftly  ebbing.  They  had  reached  a low ashen  hill  piled  at  the 
Mountain's foot; but from it there was no more escape. It was an island now,  
not long to  endure, amid the torment  of Orodruin. All about  it the  earth 
gaped, and from  deep rifts and pits smoke and fumes leaped up. Behind  them 
the Mountain was  convulsed. Great rents opened in  its side. Slow rivers of 
fire came down the  long slopes towards them. Soon they would be engulfed. A 
rain of hot ash was falling. 
     They stood now; and Sam still holding his master's hand caressed it. He 
sighed. 'What a  tale we have been in, Mr. Frodo, haven't  we?' he said.  'I  
wish I could hear it told! Do you think they'll say:  Now comes the story of 
Nine-fingered Frodo and the Ring of Doom? And then everyone  will hush, like 
we  did,  when  in Rivendell they told us the tale of Beren One-hand and the 
Great Jewel. I wish I could hear  it!  And I wonder how it will go on  after  
our part.' 
     But even while he spoke  so, to keep fear away until the very last, his 
eyes still strayed north,  north  into the eye of the wind, to where the sky 
far off was  clear,  as the cold  blast, rising to  a  gale, drove  back the 
darkness and the ruin of the clouds.  
 
     And so  it was that Gwaihir  saw them with his keen far-seeing eyes, as 
down  the  wild  wind he came,  and  daring the great peril of the skies  he 
circled in  the  air: two small dark figures,  forlorn, hand  in hand upon a  
little  hill, while the  world  shook under them, and  gasped, and rivers of 
fire drew near. And even as  he  espied them and came swooping down, he  
saw 
them  fall, worn out,  or  choked  with  fumes and heat, or stricken down by 
despair at last, hiding the ir eyes from death. 
     Side by side they lay; and  down swept Gwaihir, and down came Landroval 
and  Meneldor the swift; and in a dream, not  knowing what fate had befallen 
them,  the wanderers were  lifted up and borne far away  out of the darkness 
and the fire. 
     When Sam awoke, he found that he  was lying on some soft bed, but  over 
him  gently swayed wide  beechen boughs,  and  through  their  young  leaves 
sunlight glimmered, green and gold. All the  air was full of a sweet mingled  
scent. 
     He  remembered that smell: the  fragrance  of Ithilien. 'Bless  me!' he 
mused. 'How long have I been  asleep?' For the  scent had borne  him back to 

####-the day when he  had  lit  his little  fire under  the sunny bank; and for a  
moment all else  between was out of  waking  memory. He stretched and drew 
a 
deep breath. 'Why, what a dream I've had!' he muttered. 'I am glad to wake!' 
He sat  up and then he  saw  that  Frodo  was  lying  beside  him, and slept 
peacefully,  one  hand  behind  his  head, and  the other  resting  upon the 
coverlet. It was the right hand, and the third finger was missing. 
     Full memory flooded back, and Sam cried aloud: 'It wasn't a dream! Then 
where are we?' 
     And a  voice spoke softly behind:  'In the land of Ithilien, and in the 
keeping of the King; and he awaits you.' With that Gandalf stood before him, 
robed in white, his beard now  gleaming like  pure snow in  the twinkling of 
the leafy sunlight. 'Well, Master Samwise, how do you feel?' he said. 
     But Sam lay back, and stared with open mouth, and for a moment, between 
bewilderment  and great  joy,  he  could  not  answer.  At  last  he gasped: 
'Gandalf! I thought you were dead! But then I thought I was  dead myself. Is 
everything sad going to come untrue? What's happened to the world?' 
     'A great Shadow  has departed,' said  Gandalf, and then he  laughed and 
the  sound was like music,  or  like  water in  a  parched land; and  as  he 
listened  the thought came to  Sam  that he had not heard laughter, the pure 
sound of merriment, for days upon days without count.  It fell upon his ears 
like  the echo of all the joys he had ever  known. But he himself burst into 
tears. Then, as a  sweet rain will pass down a wind of  spring  and the  sun 
will shine out the  clearer, his  tears  ceased, and his laughter welled up, 
and laughing he sprang from his bed. 
     'How do I feel?' he cried. 'Well, I don't know how to say it. I feel, I 
feel' - he waved his arms in the air  - 'I feel like spring after winter, and 
sun on the leaves; and like trumpets and harps and all the songs I have ever  
heard!' He stopped and he turned towards his  master. 'But how's Mr. Frodo?' 
he said. 'Isn't it a shame about  his poor hand? But  I hope he's all  right 
otherwise. He's had a cruel time.' 
     'Yes, I am all right otherwise,' said Frodo, sitting up and laughing in 
his turn. I fell asleep again waiting  for  you, Sam,  you sleepyhead. I was 
awake early this morning, and now it must be nearly noon.' 
     'Noon?' said Sam, trying to calculate. 'Noon of what day? ' 
     'The fourteenth  of the New Year,' said Gandalf; 'or  if you like,  the 
eighth day of April in the Shire reckoning.( But in Gondor the New Year will 

####-always now begin upon  the twenty -fifth  of March when Sauron fell, and when 
you were brought out of the fire to the King. He has  tended you, and now he 
awaits you. You shall eat and drink with him. When you are ready I will lead 
you to him.' 
     'The King?' said Sam. 'What king, and who is he?' 
     'The King of Gondor and Lord  of the Western Lands,' said  Gandalf 'and  
he has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride soon  to his crowning, 
but he waits for you.' 
     'What shall  we  wear?' said Sam; for all he could  see was the old and 
tattered clothes that  they  had journeyed  in, lying  folded  on the ground 
beside their beds.  
     'The clothes that you wore on your way  to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Even 
the orc-rags that you bore in the black land;  Frodo, shall be preserved. No 
silks  and linens, nor any armour or heraldry  could be more honourable. But 
later I will find some other clothes, perhaps.' 
     Then he held out his hands to  them, and they  saw that one shone  with 
light. 'What have you got there?' Frodo cried. 'Can it be - ? ' 
     'Yes, I  have brought your two treasures.  They  were found on Sam when 
you were rescued.  The  Lady Galadriel's gifts: your glass,  Frodo, and your 
box, Sam. You will be glad to have these safe again.' 
     When they were washed and clad, and had eaten a light meal, the Hobbits 
followed  Gandalf.  They  stepped out of  the beech-grove in which  they had 
lain, and passed on to  a long green  lawn, glowing in sunshine, bordered by 
stately dark-leaved trees laden with scarlet blossom. Behind them they could  
hear the  sound of falling water, and a stream  ran down before them between 
flowering banks, until it came to a greenwood at the lawn's foot and  passed 
then on under an archway of trees, through  which they saw  the  shimmer  of 
water far away. 
     As they  came  to the opening in the wood, they were surprised  to  see 
knights in bright mail and tall  guards in silver and black  standing there, 
who greeted them with honour and bowed before them. And then one blew a 
long 
trumpet, and  they  went on through the  aisle of trees  beside  the singing 
stream. So they came  to  a wide green land, and beyond it was a broad river  
in a silver haze, out of which rose  a  long wooded isle, and many ships lay 
by its shores. But on the field where they now stood  a great host was drawn 
up,  in  ranks  and  companies glittering  in  the  sun.  And as the Hobbits 

####-approached swords were  unsheathed, and  spears  were  shaken, and horns and 
trumpets sang, and men cried with many voices and in many tongues:  
     'Long live the Halflings! Praise them with great praise! 
     Cuio i Pheriain anann! Aglar'ni Pheriannath! 
     Praise them with great praise, Frodo and Samwise! 
     Daur a Berhael, Conin en Annyn! Eglerio! 
     Praise them! 
     Eglerio! 
     A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet! 
     Praise them! 
     Cormacolindor, a laita tbrienna! 
     Praise them! The Ring-bearers, praise them with great praise!'  
     And  so the  red blood blushing in their faces  and their eyes  shining 
with wonder, Frodo  and Sam went forward  and saw  that amidst the 
clamorous 
host were set three high-seats  built of green turves. Behind the seat  upon 
the right floated, white on green, a great horse running free; upon the left  
was a banner, silver upon  blue, a ship swan-prowed faring on  the sea;  but 
behind the highest throne in the midst of all a great standard was spread in 
the  breeze,  and there a white  tree flowered upon a sable  field beneath a  
shining crown and seven glittering stars. On the throne sat a mail-clad man, 
a great sword was laid  across his knees, but he wore no  helm. As they drew 
near he rose. And then they knew him, changed as he was, so high and glad of 
face, kingly, lord of Men, dark-haired with eyes of grey. 
     Frodo  ran to meet  him, and Sam  followed close behind. 'Well, if that 
isn't the crown of all!' he said. 'Strider, or I'm still asleep!' 
     'Yes, Sam, Strider,'  said Aragorn. 'It is a long way, is  it not, from 
Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all but yours 
has been the darkest road.' 
     And then to Sam's surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee before 
them; and taking them by the hand,  Frodo upon  his  right and Sam upon  his 
left, he led them to the throne, and  setting them upon it, he turned to the 
men and captains who stood by and spoke, so that his voice rang over all the 
host, crying: 
     'Praise them with great praise!' 
     And  when  the glad shout had swelled up and died away  again, to Sam's 
final and  complete satisfaction  and pure joy, a  minstrel of Gondor  stood 

####-forth, and knelt, and begged leave to sing. And behold! he said: 
     'Lo! lords and knights and  men of valour unashamed, kings and princes,  
and fair people of Gondor, and Riders of Rohan,  and ye sons of  Elrond, and 
D®nedain  of the North, and Elf and Dwarf, and greathearts of the Shire, and 
all free folk of the West, now  listen to my lay. For  I will sing to you of 
Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the Ring of Doom.' 
     And when  Sam  heard that he laughed aloud for  sheer delight,  and  he 
stood  up and cried:  'O great glory and  splendour! And all my wishes  have  
come true!' And then he wept. 
     And all  the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their merriment 
and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver and gold, and all 
men  were hushed. And he  sang to them, now in the  Elven-tongue, now in the 
speech  of  the  West,  until   their  hearts,  wounded  with  sweet  words, 
overflowed, and their joy was like swords, and they passed in thought out to 
regions where pain and delight flow together and tears are the  ver y wine of 
blessedness.  
     And at the last, as the Sun fell from the  noon and the  shadows of the 
trees lengthened,  he  ended. 'Praise them  with  great praise!' he said and 
knelt. And then Aragorn stood up, and all the host arose, and they passed to 
pavilions made ready, to eat and drink and make merry while the day lasted. 
     Frodo and Sam were led apart and brought to a tent, and there their old 
raiment was taken off, but folded and set aside with honour; and clean linen  
was  given  to them. Then  Gandalf came and in his  arms,  to the  wonder of  
Frodo, he  bore  the sword and the elven-cloak and the mithril-coat that had 
been taken from him in Mordor. For Sam he brought a coat of gilded mail, and 
his elven-cloak all healed of  the soils and hurts that it had suffered; and 
then he laid before them two swords. 
     'I do not wish for any sword,' said Frodo. 
     'Tonight at least you should wear one,' said Gandalf. 
     Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and had  been 
laid at his side in Cirith Ungol. 'Sting I gave to you Sam,' he said. 
     'No, master!  Mr. Bilbo gave it  to you,  and  it goes with his  silver  
coat; he would not wish anyone else to wear it now.' 
     Frodo gave way; and  Gandalf, as if  he  were their esquire, knelt  and 
girt  the sword-belts about them, and  then rising he set circlets of silver  
upon their heads. And when they were arrayed  they went  to the great feast; 
and  they sat at the King's table with Gandalf, and King Jomer of Rohan, and 

####-the Prince Imrahil and all the chief captains; and there also were Gimli and 
Legolas.  
     But  when, after the  Standing Silence, wine was brought there came  in 
two esquires to  serve  the kings; or  so they seemed to be: one was clad in 
the silver and sable of the Guards  of Minas Tirith, and the other  in white 
and green. But Sam wondered  what such young boys were  doing in an  army 
of 
mighty men. Then suddenly  as they  drew near and he could see them plainly, 
he exclaimed: 
     'Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn't Pippin. Mr. Peregrin 
Took I should say, and Mr.  Merry! How they have grown! Bless  me! But I 
can 
see there's more tales to tell than ours.' 
     'There  are indeed,' said Pippin turning towards him. 'And  we'll begin 
telling them,  as soon  as this feast is ended. In the meantime you  can try 
Gandalf. He's not so close as he used to be,  though he laughs now more than 
he talks.  For the present Merry and I are busy.  We are knights of the City 
and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.' 
     At  last the glad day ended; and  when  the Sun  was gone and the  round 
Moon  rode  slowly  above  the  mists of  Anduin  and flickered through  the 
fluttering  leaves,  Frodo and  Sam sat under the whispering  trees amid the 
fragrance of fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into the  night  with Merry 
and Pippin  and Gandalf, and after  a  while Legolas  and Gimli joined them. 
There Frodo and  Sam learned much  of all that had happened to  the  Company 
after their fellowship was broken on the  evil day  at Parth Galen by Rauros 
Falls; and still there was always more to ask and more to tell. 
     Orcs, and talking  trees, and leagues of  grass,  and galloping riders. 
and  glittering caves, and white towers and  golden halls, and  battles, and 
tall  ships  sailing,  all  these  passed  before  Sam's  mind until he felt 
bewildered.  But  amidst  all  these  wonders  he  returned  always  to  his 
astonishment at the size of Merry and Pippin; and he made them stand back to 
back with Frodo and himself. He scratched his head. 'Can't understand it  at 
your  age!' he  said. 'But there it is: you're three  inches taller than you  
ought to he, or I'm a dwarf.' 
     'That you certainly are not,' said  Gimli. 'But what did I say? Mortals 
cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come of them than of a  
pot of beer.' 

####-     'Ent-draughts?' said Sam. 'There you go about Ents again; but what they 
are beats me. Why, it  will take weeks before we  get all these things sized 
up!' 
     'Weeks indeed,' said Pippin. 'And then Frodo will have  to be locked up 
in a tower in Minas Tirith and  write it  all down. Otherwise he will forget 
half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.' 
     At length  Gandalf rose. 'The hands of the King  are  hands of healing, 
dear friends,' he  said.  'But you  went  to the very brink of death ere  he 
recalled  you,  putting forth all his power,  and  sent you  into the  sweet 
forgetfulness of sleep. And though you have indeed slept long and blessedly, 
still it is now time to sleep again.' 
     And not  only Sam and Frodo  here, said  Gimli, but you too, Pippin.  I 
love you, if only because of the pains you have cost me, which I shall never  
forget. Nor shall I forget  finding you on the hill of  the last battle. But 
for Gimli the Dwarf you  would have been lost  then. But at least I know now 
the look of a  hobbit's foot, though it be all that can be seen under a heap 
of bodies.  And when  I heaved that  great  carcase off you, I made sure you  
were dead. I could have.  torn out my beard. And it is only a day  yet since 
you were first up and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.' 
     'And  I,'  said  Legolas, 'shall walk in  the woods of this  fair land, 
which is rest enough. In days to come, if my Elven-lord allows, some of  our 
folk shall remove hither; and when we come it shall be blessed, for a while. 
For a while: a month, a life,  a hundred years  of Men.  But Anduin is near, 
and Anduin leads down to the Sea. To the Sea! 
     To the Sea, to the Sea! The white gulls are crying, 
     The wind is blowing, and the white foam is flying. 
     West, west away, the round sun is falling. 
     Grey ship, grey ship, do you hear them calling. 
     The voices of my people that have gone before me? 
     I will leave, I will leave the wo ods that bore me; 
     For our days are ending and our years failing. 
     I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing. 
     Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling, 
     Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling, 
     In Eressla, in Elvenhome that no man can discover, 
     Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever!'  
     And so singing Legolas went away down the hill. 

####-     Then the others also departed, and Frodo and Sam went to their beds and 
slept. And in the morning they  rose again in hope and peace; and they spent 
many days  in  Ithilien. For the Field of Cormallen, where the host was  now 
encamped was near to Henneth  Annyn,  and  the stream that  flowed  from its 
falls could be heard  in the night as it rushed down through its rocky gate, 
and passed through the flowery meads into the tides of Anduin by the Isle of  
Cair Andros. The hobbits wandered here  and there visiting again the  places  
that  they had passed before; and Sam hoped always  in  some shadow  of  the 
woods or secret glade to catch, maybe, a glimpse of the great Oliphaunt. And 
when he learned that at the siege of Gondor there had been a great number of 
these beasts but that they were all destroyed, he thought it a sad loss.  
     'Well, one  can't be everywhere  at once, I  suppose,'  he said. 'But I 
missed a lot, seemingly.' 
     In the meanwhile  the host made  ready for  the return to Minas Tirith. 
The weary rested and the hurt were healed. For some had laboured and  fought 
much with the remnants  of  the  Easterlings  and Southrons, until  all were 
subdued. And, latest of  all, those returned who had passed into  Mordor and 
destroyed the fortresses in the north of the land. 
     But  at the last when the month of May was drawing near the Captains of 
the West set out a gain; and they  went  aboard ship with all  their men, and 
they  sailed  from  Cair Andros  down Anduin to  Osgiliath; and  there  they  
remained for one day; and the day after they came to the green fields of the 
Pelennor and saw again the white  towers  under tall Mindolluin, the City of 
the  Men of Gondor, last memory  of Westernesse, that had passed through the 
darkness and fire to a new day. 
     And there in the  midst of the fields they set up  their pavilions  and 
awaited the morning; for it was the Eve of May, and the King would enter his 
gates with the rising of the Sun. 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. The Steward and the King 

 
 
     Over  the city of Gondor doubt and  great  dread had hung. Fair weather  
and clear  sun had seemed but a mockery to men whose days  held  little hope, 
and  who  looked each  morning  for  news  of doom. Their lord was  dead and 
burned, dead lay the King of Rohan in their citadel,  and the  new king that 
had  come to them in the night was gone again to  a war with powers too dark 
and terrible for any might or valour to conquer. And no news came. After the 
host left Morgul Vale and  took the northward road beneath the shadow of the 
mountains no messenger had  returned nor any rumour  of what was passing  in 
the brooding East. 
     When the Captains were but two days gone, the Lady Jowyn bade the 
women 
who tended her  to  bring her  raiment, and she would  not  be gainsaid, but 
rose; and when they had clothed her and set her arm in a sling of linen, she 
went to the Warden of the Houses of Healing. 
     'Sir,' she  said, 'I am in great  unrest,  and  I cannot lie longer  in 
sloth.' 
     'Lady,' he answered, 'you are  not  yet  healed, and I was commanded to 
tend you  with especial care. You should  not  have risen  from your bed for  
seven days yet , or so I was bidden. I beg you to go back.' 
     'I am  healed,' she said,  'healed at  least in body, save  my left arm 
only, and  that is at ease. But I shall sicken anew, if there is naught that 
I can do. Are there no tidings of war? The women can tell  me nothing.' 
     'There are  no tidings,' said the Warden,  'save  that  the  Lords have 
ridden to Morgul Vale; and men say that the new captain out  of the North is 
their chief. A great lord is that, and a  healer;  and it is a thing passing 
strange to me that  the healing hand should  also wield the sword. It is not 
thus  in Gondor now,  though once it was  so, if old tales be  true. But for  
long years we healers have only sought to patch the rents made by the men of 
swords. Though we should still have enough  to do without them: the world is 
full enough of hurts and mischances without wars to multiply them.' 
     It needs but one foe to breed a war, not two,  Master  Warden, answered 
Jowyn. 'And those who  have not swords can  still die  upon them. Would  you  
have  the folk  of Gondor gather you herbs  only, when the Dark Lord gathers 

####-armies? And it  is not  always good  to be healed in  body. Nor is it always 
evil to die in battle, even  in bitter pain. Were I permitted,  in this dark 
hour I would choose the latter.' 
     The Warden looked at her. Tall she stood there, her eyes  bright in her  
white face, her hand clenched as she turned and gazed out of his window that 
opened to the East. He sighed and shook his head. After a pause  she  turned 
to him again. 
     'Is there no deed to do?' she said. 'Who commands in this City?' 
     'I do not  rightly know,' he  answered. 'Such things are  not my  care. 
There is a marshal over the Riders  of Rohan; and the Lord H®rin, I am told, 
commands the men of Gondor. But  the Lord Faramir is by right the Steward of 
the City.' 
     'Where can I find him?' 
     'In this house, lady. He was sorely  hurt,  but is now set again on the 
way to health. But I do not know--' 
     'Will you not bring me to him? Then you will know. ' 
     The Lord  Faramir was  walking  alone in  the garden  of the  Houses of 
Healing, and the sunlight warmed him, and he felt life run new in his veins; 
but his heart  was heavy, and he looked  out  over the  walls  eastward. And 
coming, the Warden  spoke his name, and he turned and saw the Lady  Jowyn 
of 
Rohan; and he  was  moved with pity, for  he saw that she was hurt,  and his 
clear sight perceived her sorrow and unrest. 
     'My lord,' said  the Warden, 'here is the Lady Jowyn of Rohan. She rode 
wi th the king and  was sorely hurt, and dwells now in my keeping. But she is 
not content, and she wishes to speak to the Steward of the City.' 
     'Do not misunderstand him, lord,'  said Jowyn. 'It is not lack  of care 
that  grieves me.  No  houses  could be  fairer, for those who  desire to be 
healed.  But I  cannot  lie  in sloth,  idle,  caged. I looked  for death in 
battle. But I have not died, and battle still goes on.' 
     At a sign from  Faramir, the Warden bowed and departed. 'What would you  
have me do, lady?' said Faramir.  'I also am a prisoner of the healers.'  He 
looked  at her, and being a man  whom pity deeply stirred,  it seemed to him 
that her loveliness amid her grief would pierce his heart. And she looked at 
him and saw the grave tenderness in his eyes, and yet knew, for she was bred 
among men of war, that here was one whom no Rider of the Mark would 
outmatch 

####-in battle. 
     'What  do you wish?' he said again. 'If  it lies in my power, I will do 
it.' 
     'I would have  you  command this  Warden, and bid him  let me go,'  she 
said; but though her words were still proud, her heart faltered, and for the 
first time she doubted herself. She  guessed  that this tall man, both stern 
and  gentle, might think  her merely wayward, like a child that has not  the 
firmness of mind to go on with a dull task to the end. 
     'I myself am  in the Warden's  keeping,' answered Faramir. 'Nor  have I 
yet taken  up my authority in the City. But  had I done so,  I  should still 
listen to  his counsel,  and should  not cross  his will in  matters of  his 
craft, unless in some great need.' 
     'But I do not desire healing,' she said. 'I wish to ride to war like my 
brother Jomer, or better  like  Thjoden the king, for he  died  and has both 
honour and peace.' 
     'It  is too late, lady,  to follow the Captains, even  if you  had  the 
strength,'  said Faramir.  'But death  in battle  may  come  to  us all yet, 
willing  or unwilling. You will be  better prepared to  face it in your  own 
manner, if while there is still time you do as the Healer commanded. You and 
I, we must endure with patience the hours of waiting.' 
     She  did not answer, but  as  he looked  at her it  seemed to  him that 
something  in her  softened, as though  a bitter frost  were yielding at the 
first faint presage of Spring. A  tear sprang in her  eye  and fell down her  
cheek, like  a  glistening rain-drop.  Her proud head drooped a little. Then 
quietly, more as if speaking  to herself than to him: 'But the healers would 
have me lie abed seven days yet,'  she said. 'And  my  window does not  look 
eastward.' Her voice was now that of a maiden young and sad. 
     Faramir  smiled, though his heart was  filled with  pity.  'Your window 
does not look eastward?'  he said. 'That  can be  amended.  In  this I  will 
command  the Warden. If  you will stay in this  house in our care, lady, and 
take your rest, then you  shall walk in this garden in the sun, as you will; 
and you shall  look east, whither all our hopes have gone. And here you will  
find me, walking and waiting, and also looking east.  It would ease my care,  
if you would speak to me, or walk at whiles with me.' 
     Then she raised her head and looked him in the eyes again; and a colour 
came in her  pale face.  'How should I ease your care,  my  lord?' she said. 
'And I do not desire the speech of living men.' 

####-     'Would you have my plain answer?' he said. 
     'I would.' 
     'Then, Jowyn  of Rohan, I say to  you  that you  are  beautiful. In the 
valleys  of our hills there are flowers fair  and bright, and maidens fairer  
still; but neither flower nor lady have I seen till now in Gondor so lovely, 
and so sorrowful. It may be that only a few days are left ere darkness falls 
upon our world,  and when it comes I hope to  face it steadily; but it would 
ea se my heart, if while the Sun yet shines, I  could see you  still. For you  
and I have both passed under the wings of the Shadow, and the same hand drew 
us back.' 
     'Alas, not me, lord!' she said. 'Shadow  lies on me still.  Look not to 
me for healing! I am a shieldmaiden and my hand is ungentle. But I thank you  
for this at least, that I need not keep to my chamber. I will walk abroad by 
the grace of the Steward of the City.' And she did him a courtesy and walked 
back to the house. But Faramir for a long while walked  alone in the garden,  
and his glance now strayed rather to the house than to the eastward walls. 
     When he returned to his chamber he called for the Warden, and heard all  
that he could tell of the Lady of Rohan. 
     'But I doubt  not,  lor d,'  said the Warden, 'that you would learn more 
from the Halfling that is with us; for he was in the riding of the king, and 
with the Lady at the end, they say.' 
     And so Merry was sent to Faramir, and while that day lasted they talked 
long  together, and  Faramir  learned  much, more  even  than Merry put into 
words; and  he  thought  that he understood now  something of the grief  and 
unrest of Jowyn of Rohan. And in the  fair evening Faramir and  Merry walked 
in the garden, but she did not come. 
     But in the morning, as Faramir came from the Houses, he saw her, as she 
stood upon the walls; and she was clad all in white, and gleamed in the sun. 
And he called to her, and she came down, and they walked on the grass or sat 
under a green  tree  together , now in  silence, now in speech. And  each day 
after they did likewise. And the Warden looking  from his window was glad in 
heart.  for  he was a healer. and his care was lightened; and certain it was 
that, heavy as was the dread and foreboding of those days upon the hearts of 
men, still these two of his charges prospered and grew daily in strength. 
     And so the  fifth day came since the Lady Jowyn went  first to Faramir; 
and they stood now together once more upon the walls of  the City and looked 
out. No tidings  had  yet come, and all hearts  were darkened. The  weather, 

####-too, was  bright  no  longer. It was cold. A wind  that had sprung up in the 
night was  blowing  now keenly from  the North, and it was  rising; but  the 
lands about looked grey and dr ear. 
     They were clad in warm  raiment and heavy cloaks, and over all the Lady  
Jowyn wore a  great blue  mantle of  the colour of deep summer -night, and it  
was set with silver stars  about hem and  throat. Faramir had  sent for this 
robe and had wrapped  it about her;  and he thought that  she looked fair and  
queenly indeed as  she stood there at  his  side. The mantle was wrought for  
his  mother,  Finduilas of Amroth,  who died untimely, and was  to him but a 
memory of loveliness in far days and of his first grief; and her robe seemed 
to him raiment fitting for the beauty and sadness of Jowyn. 
     But  she  now  shivered  beneath the  starry  mantle,  and  she  looked 
northward, above the grey hither lands, into the eye of the  cold wind where 
far away the sky was hard and clear. 
     'What do you look for, Jowyn?' said Faramir. 
     'Does not the Black Gate lie yonder?' said she. 'And must he not now be 
come thither? It is seven days since he rode away.' 
     'Seven days,' said Faramir. 'But think not il l of me, if I say  to you: 
they have brought me both a joy and a pain that I never thought to know. Joy 
to see you; but pain, because now the fear  and doubt  of this evil time are 
grown dark  indeed. Jowyn, I would  not have this world end now, or lose  so 
soon what I have found.' 
     'Lose what you have found,  lord?' she answered; but she looked at  him 
gravely and her eyes  were  kind. 'I know  not what in  these days you  have 
found that you could lose. But come, my friend,  let us not speak of it! Let 
us not speak at all! I  stand  upon some dreadful  brink,  and it is utterly 
dark in the abyss before my feet, but whether there is any light behind me I 
cannot tell. For I cannot turn yet. I wait for some stroke of doom.' 
     'Yes, we wait for the stroke of doom,' said Faramir.  And  they said no 
more; and it seemed to them as  they stood upon the wall that the wind died,  
and the light failed, and the Sun was bleared, and all sounds in the City or  
in the  lands about were hushed: neither wind, nor voice , nor bird-call, nor  
rustle  of leaf,  nor  their own breath could  be heard; the very beating of 
their hearts was stilled. Time halted. 
     And as they stood so, their hands met and  clasped, though they did not 
know  it.  And still  they waited for they   knew not what. Then presently it 
seemed to them that above the ridges  of the distant  mountains another vast  

####-mountain of darkness  rose, towering up like a wave  that  should engulf the 
world, and about it  lightnings flickered; and then a tremor ran through the 
earth, and they felt the  walls of the City quiver. A sound like a sigh went 
up from all the lands about them; and their hearts beat suddenly again. 
     'It  reminds me of N®menor,' said Faramir, and wondered to hear himself 
speak. 
     'Of N®menor?' said Jowyn. 
     'Yes,' said Faramir, 'of the land of Westernesse that  foundered and of 
the great dark wave climbing  over the green lands and above the hills,  and 
coming on, darkness unescapable. I often dream of it.' 
     'Then  you  think that the  Darkness is coming?' said Jowyn.  'Darkness 
Unescapable?' And suddenly she drew close to him. 
     'No,' said Faramir, looking into her face. 'It was but a picture in the 
mind. I do not know what is happening. The reason of my waking mind tells 
me 
that great evil  has befallen and we  stand at the end of days. But my heart 
says nay; and all my limbs are light, and a hope and joy are come to me that 
no reason can deny. Jowyn, Jowyn, White Lady of Rohan, in this hour I do not 
believe that any darkness will endure!' And he stooped and kissed her brow.  
     And so they stood on the walls of the City of Gondor,  and a great wind 
rose and blew, and  their hair, raven  and golden, streamed out  mingling in 
the air. And the Shadow departed, and the Sun was unveiled, and light leaped 
forth; and the waters of Anduin shone like silver, and in all  the houses of 
the  City  men  sang for  the joy that welled  up in their hearts  from what 
source they could not tell. 
     And before the Sun had fallen far  from the noon out of  the East there 
came a great Eagle flying, and he bore tidings beyond hope from the Lords of 
the West, crying: 
     Sing now, ye people of the Tower of Anor, 
     for the Realm of Sauron is ended for ever, 
     and the Dark Tower is thrown down. 
 
     Sing and rejoice, ye people of the Tower of Guard, 
     for your watch hath not been in vain, 
     and the Black Gate is broken, 
     and your King hath passed through, 
     and he is victorious. 

####- 
     Sing and be glad, all ye children of the West, 
     for your King shall come again, 
     and he shall dwell among you 
     all the days of your life. 
 
     And the Tree that was withered shall be renewed, 
     and he shall plant it in the high places, 
     and the City shall be blessed. 
 
     Sing all ye people! 
     And the people sang in all the ways of the City. 
     The  days  that followed were golden,  and Spring and Summer joined and 
made revel  together in  the fields of Gondor. And tidings now came by swift 
riders from Cair  Andros of all  that  was done, and the City made ready for  
the coming of the King. Merry was summoned and rode away with the wains 
that 
took store  of  goods to Osgiliath and thence by  ship  to Cair  Andros; but 
Faramir did not go,  for now being healed he took upon him his authority and 
the  Stewardship, although it was only for a little while, and his duty  was 
to prepare for one who should replace him. 
     And Jowyn did not go, though her brother sent  word begging her to come 
to  the  field of  Cormallen.  And Faramir  wondered at this, but he saw her  
seldom, being  busy  with many matters; and she dwelt still in the Houses of 
Healing and walked alone in the garden, and her face grew pale again, and it  
seemed that  in  all the City she  only  was ailing  and sorrowful.  And the 
Warden of the Houses was troubled, and he spoke to Faramir. 
     Then Faramir came and sought her, and once more they stood on the walls 
together; and he said to  her: 'Jowyn, why  do you tarry here, and do not go 
to the rejoicing in  Cormallen beyond Cair Andros, where your brother awaits 
you?' 
     And she said: 'Do you not know?' 
     But he answered: 'Two reasons there may be, but which is true, l do not 
know.' 
     And she said: 'I do not wish to play at riddles. Speak plainer!' 
     'Then if you  will have it so, lady,' he  said: 'you do  not go, because 
only your brother called for you, and to look on the Lord Aragorn, Elendil's 

####-heir, in his triumph would now bring you no joy. Or because I do not go, and 
you  desire still to be near me. And maybe for both  these reasons,  and you  
yourself cannot choose between them. Jowyn, do  you not love me, or will you  
not?' 
     'I wished to be loved by another,' she answered. 'But I desire no man's 
pity.' 
     'That I know,' he  said. 'You  desired  to  have  the love  of the Lord 
Aragorn. Because he was high and puissant, and you wished to have renown 
and 
glory and to be  lifted far above the  mean things that crawl on  the earth. 
And as a great captain may to a young soldier  he seemed  to you  admirable. 
For so he is, a lord among men,  the greatest that  now is. But when he gave  
you only  understanding and pity, then you desired to have nothing, unless a  
brave death in battle. Look at me, Jowyn!' 
     And Jowyn  looked at Faramir long and  steadily; and Faramir  said: 'Do 
not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart, Jowyn! But I do not offer  
you my pity. For  you  are  a lady high  and valiant  and  have yourself won 
renown that shall not be forgotten; and you  are  a lady  beautiful, I deem, 
beyond even the words of  the Elven-tongue  to tell. And I love  you. Once I  
pitied your sorrow. But now, were you sorrowless, without fear  or any lack, 
were you the blissful Queen of Gondor, still I would love you. Jowyn, do you 
not love me?' 
     Then the heart of Jowyn changed, or else at last she understood it. And 
suddenly her winter passed, and the sun shone on her. 
     I stand in Minas Anor, the Tower of the Sun,  she  said; and behold the 
Shadow has departed! I  will be a shieldmaiden no longer, nor  vie  with the  
great Riders, nor take joy only in the songs of slaying. I will be a healer, 
and love all things that  grow and are not barren.' And again  she looked at 
Faramir. 'No longer do I desire to be a queen,' she said. 
     Then Faramir laughed merrily.  'That is well,' he said; 'for I am not  a  
king. Yet I will wed with the White Lady of Rohan, if it be her will. And if 
she  will, then let us cross  the  River and in happier days let us dwell in 
fair Ithilien  and there make a garden. All things will grow with joy there, 
if the White Lady comes.' 
     'Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor?' she said. 'And  would 
you have  your proud  folk say of you: (There  goes a  lord who tamed a wild 
shieldmaiden  of the North! Was  there  no woman of the race  of N®menor  to 

####-choose?(' 
     'I  would,'  said  Faramir. And he took her in his arms and  kissed her  
under  the  sunlit sky, and he cared not that they stood high upon the walls 
in  the  sight  of many. And many indeed saw  them  and the light that shone 
about them as they came down from  the  walls  and went hand in hand  to the 
Houses of Healing. 
     And to the Warden of  the Houses Faramir said:  'Here is the Lady Jowyn 
of Rohan, and now she is healed.' 
     And the  Warden  said: 'Then I release her from  my charge and bid  her  
farewell, and may she suffer never hurt nor sickness again. I commend her to 
the care of the Steward of the City, until her brother returns.' 
     But Jowyn said:  'Yet  now that I have leave to depart, I would remain. 
For this House has become to me of all dwellings  the most blessed.' And she 
remained there until King Jomer came. 
     All things  were  now  made  ready  in  the City; and there  was  great 
concourse of  people, for the tidings had gone out into all parts of Gondor, 
from Min-Rimmon even to Pinnath Gelin and the far coasts of the sea; and all 
that could  come to the  City made haste  to come.  And the City  was filled 
again with women  and fair children  that returned to their homes laden with 
flowers;  and from Dol Amroth came the harpers that harped most skilfully in 
all the land; and there  were players upon viols and  upon  flutes and  upon 
horns of silver, and clear-voiced singers from the vales of Lebennin. 
     At last an evening came when from the walls the pavilions could be seen 
upon  the field, and all night lights were  burning as men  watched for  the 
dawn. And when the sun rose in  the clear morning above the mountains in the 
East, upon which shadows lay no more, then  all  the bells rang, and all the 
banners  broke  and  flowed in the wind;  and upon  the White  Tower  of the  
citadel the standard of  the Stewards,  bright argent like snow  in the sun, 
bearing no charge nor device, was raised over Gondor for the last time. 
     Now the Captains of the West  led their host towards the City, and folk  
saw them advance in line upon line, flashing and glinting in the sunrise and 
rippling  like silver.  And  so they came  before the Gateway and  halted  a  
furlong from the walls. As yet no gates had been set up again, but a barrier  
was laid across the entrance  to the City, and  there  stood men at  arms in 
silver  and  black with long swords drawn.  Before the barrier stood Faramir  
the Steward, and H®rin Warden of the Keys, and other captains of Gondor, and 
the  Lady  Jowyn of Rohan with Elfhelm the Marshal and many  knights of  the 

####-Mark; and upon either  side of  the Gate was a great press of fair people in 
raiment of many colours and garlands of flowers.  
     So now there was a wide space before  the walls of Minas Tirith, and it 
was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the  soldiers of Gondor  and 
of Rohan, and by the people of the City and of all parts of the land. A hush 
fell upon all as out from the host stepped  the D®nedain in silver and grey; 
and before  them  came  walking slow the Lord Aragorn. He was  clad in black  
mail  girt  with silver, and  he wore a long mantle of pure white clasped at 
the throat with a great jewel  of green that shone  from afar;  but his head 
was bare  save for a star  upon his forehead bound  by a  slender fillet  of 
silver.  With him were Jomer of Rohan,  and the Prince  Imrahil, and Gandalf 
robed all in white, and four small figures that many men marvelled to see. 
     'Nay,  cousin! they are  not  boys,' said Ioreth to her  kinswoman from 
Imloth  Melui,  who stood beside  her. 'Those  are Periain , out  of the  far 
country of  the Halflings, where they are princes of great fame, it is said. 
I should know, for I had one to tend in the Houses. They are small, but they 
are valiant. Why, cousin, one  of them went  with only his esquire  into the 
Black Country and fought with the Dark Lord all by himself, and set fire  to  
his  Tower,  if  you can believe it. At least that is  the tale in the City. 
That will be the one that walks with our Elfstone. They are dear friends,  I 
hear.  Now  he  is  a marvel, the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech, 
mind  you, but  he  has a golden heart,  as  the saying is; and  he has  the 
healing hands. (The hands  of the king are  the  hands of a healer(, I said; 
and  that was how  it  was all  discovered. And  Mithrandir,  he said to me: 
(Ioreth, men will long remember your words(, and--' 
     But  Ioreth  was  not  permitted  to  continue the instruction  of  her  
kinswoman  from  the country,  for a single trumpet rang, and a dead silence 
followed. Then forth from the Gate went  Faramir with H®rin of the Keys, and 
no  others, save  that behind  them  walked four men  in  the high helms and  
armour of the Citadel, and they bore a great casket of black lebethron bound 
with silver. 
     Faramir met  Aragorn in  the  midst  of those there  assembled, and  he 
knelt,  and said: 'The last  Steward of Gondor begs  leave to  surrender his 
office.' And he held out a  white rod; but Aragorn took the  rod and gave it 
back, saying:  'That  office is  not ended, and  it shall be thine  and  thy 
heirs' as long as my line shall last. Do now thy office!' 
     Then Faramir stood up and spoke in  a clear voice:  'Men of Gondor hear  

####-now the  Steward of this Realm! Behold! one has come  to  claim the kingship 
again at last. Here is Aragorn son of Arathorn, chieftain of the D®nedain of  
Arnor,  Captain of the Host of  the West,  bearer of the  Star of the North, 
wielder of  the Sword  Reforged, victorious  in  battle,  whose hands  bring 
healing,  the Elfstone,  Elessar  of  the line of Valandil,  Isildur's  son, 
Elendil's son of N®menor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell 
there?' 
     And all the host and all the people cried yea with one voice. 
     And Ioreth  said  to her kinswoman: 'This is just a ceremony such as we 
have in the City, cousin; for  he has already entered, as I was telling you; 
and he said  to me--' And then again she was obliged to silence, for Faramir 
spoke again. 
     'Men of Gondor, the loremasters tell that it was the custom of old that 
the king should receive the  crown from his father ere  he died; or if  that 
might not be, that  he should  go alone and  take  it from the hands  of his 
father  in the tomb  where  he was  laid.  But since things must now be done  
otherwise,  using the authority of the Steward, I  have today brought hither 
from Rath Dnnen the  crown of Edrnur the last king, whose days passed in the 
time of our longfathers of old.' 
     Then the  guards stepped forward, and Faramir opened the casket, and he 
held up an ancient  crown. It was shaped like the helms of the Guards of the 
Citadel, save  that it was loftier, and it was all  white, and the  wings at 
either side were wrought of pearl and silver in the likeness of the wings of 
a sea -bird, for it was the emblem of kings  who came over the Sea; and seven 
gems  of adamant  were  set  in  the circlet, and upon  its summit was set a  
single jewel the light of which went up like a flame. 
     Then Aragorn took the crown and held it up and said: 
     Et  Edrello  Endorenna  ut®lien.  Sinome  maruvan  ar  Hildinyar  tenn' 
Ambar-metta! 
     And those were the  words that Elendil spoke when he came up out of the 
Sea on the wings  of  the wind: 'Out of  the Great Sea to  M iddle-earth I am 
come.  In this place will I abide,  and  my heirs, unto  the  ending of  the 
world.' 
     Then to the wonder of many Aragorn did not put the crown upon his head, 
but  gave it back to Faramir, and  said: 'By the labour and valour of many I 
have come into my inheritance. In token of this I would have the Ring-bearer 
bring the crown to me,  and let Mithrandir set it upon my  head, if he will; 

####-for he has been the mover of all that has been accomplished, and this is his 
victory.' 
     Then Frodo  came forward and took the crown from Faramir and bore  it to 
Gandalf; and Aragorn  knelt,  and Gandalf set the White Crown upon his head, 
and said: 
     'Now  come  the days  of the  King, and may  they be blessed  while the 
thrones of the Valar endure!' 
     But when  Aragorn arose  all that beheld him  gazed in  silence, for it 
seemed to them  that he was revealed to them now for the first time. Tall as 
the sea -kings of old, he stood  above all that were near; ancient of days he 
seemed and yet in  the fl ower of manhood; and wisdom sat upon his brow,  and 
strength and healing were in his hands, and a light was  about him. And then 
Faramir cried: 
     'Behold the King!' 
     And  in that moment all the trumpets  were  blown, and the King Elessar  
went  forth  and came to the barrier, and  H®rin  of the Keys thrust it back; 
and amid the music of harp and of viol and of flute and the singing of clear 
voices the  King passed through  the flower -laden streets,  and  came to the 
Citadel,  and  entered  in;  and the banner  of  the Tree and the Stars  was 
unfurled  upon the topmost tower,  and  the reign of King Elessar began,  of 
which many songs have told. 
     In his time  the City was made more fair than it had ever been, even in 
the  days of  its first  glory;  and it  was  filled  with  trees  and  with 
fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithril  and steel, and its streets 
were paved  with white marble; and the Folk of the Mountain laboured in  it,  
and the Folk of the Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed and made 
good, and  the  houses were filled with men  and women  and  the laughter of 
children,  and no window was blind nor any courtyard  empty;  and after  the 
ending  of  the Third  Age of  the world into the  new  age it preserved the 
memory and the glory of the years that were gone. 
     In the days  that  followed his crowning  the King sat on his throne in 
the Hall of the Kings and pronounced his judgements. And embassies came 
from 
many lands and peoples, from the East and the South, and from the borders of 
Mirkwood,  and  from  Dunland  in  the  west.  And  the  King  pardoned  the 
Easterlings that had  given themselves up, and sent them  away free, and  he 
made peace with  the peoples of Harad;  and the slaves of Mordor he released 

####-and gave  to them all the lands about Lake N®rnen to be their own. And there 
were  brought  before him many to  receive  his praise and reward  for their 
valour; and  last the  captain  of the Guard brought to him  Beregond  to be 
judged. 
     And  the  King said  to  Beregond: 'Beregond, by  your sword blood  was 
spilled  in the Hallows, where that  is forbidden.  Also  you left your post  
without leave of Lord or of Captain. For these things, of old, death was the 
penalty. Now therefore I must pronounce your doom. 
     'All penalty  is remitted  for  your valour in battle,  and still  more 
because all that you  did was for the love of the Lord Faramir.  Nonetheless 
you must leave the Guard of the Citadel, and you must go forth from the City 
of Minas Tirith.' 
     Then the blood left Beregond's face, and he was stricken to  the  heart 
and bowed his head. But the King said.: 
     'So it must be,  for you are  appointed to the White Company, the Guard 
of Faramir,  Prince of Ithilien, and you shall  be its captain  and dwell in 
Emyn  Arnen in  honour  and peace, and in  the service of him  for whom  you  
risked all, to save him from death.' 
     And then Beregond, perceiving the mercy  and justice  of the  King, was 
glad,  and kneeling kissed his hand, and  departed  in joy  and content. And 
Aragorn gave to Faramir Ithilien to  be his princedom, and bade him dwell in 
the hills of Emyn Arnen within sight of the City. 
     'For,' said he, 'Minas Ithil in Morgul Vale shall be utterly destroyed, 
and though it may in time to come be made clean,  no man may dwell there for  
many long years.' 
     And last of  all Aragorn greeted Jomer of Rohan, and they embraced, and  
Aragorn said: 'Between  us there can be no word of giving or taking,  nor of 
reward; for we are brethren. In happy hour did Eorl ride from the North, and 
never has  any league of peoples been more blessed, so that neither has ever  
failed the other, nor shall fail. Now, as you know, we have laid Thjoden the 
Renowned in a tomb in the Hallows, and there he shall lie for ever among the 
Kings of Gondor, if you will. Or if you desire it, we will come to Rohan and 
bring him back to rest with his own people.' 
     And Jomer answered: 'Since the day when you rose before me  out of  the 
green grass of the downs I have loved you , and that love shall not fail. But 
now I must depart  for a while to my own realm, where there is much  to heal 
and set in order.  But as for  the Fallen,  when  all is made ready we  will 

####-return for him; but here let him sleep a while.' 
     And Jowyn  said to Faramir: 'Now I must go back to my own land and look  
on it once again, and help my brother in his labour;  but  when  one  whom I  
long loved as father is laid at last to rest, I will return.' 
     So  the  glad days  passed; and on the  eighth day o f May the Riders of 
Rohan made ready, and rode off by the North-way, and with them went the 
sons 
of Elrond. All the road  was lined with people to do them  honour and praise 
them, from the Gate of the City  to  the  walls of the  Pelennor.  Then  all 
others that dwelt afar went back to their homes  rejoicing; but in the  City 
there was  labour of many willing hands to  rebuild  and renew and to remove 
all the scars of war and the memory of the darkness.  
     The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and Gimli; for  
Aragorn  was  loth for the fellowship  to be dissolved. 'At  last  all  such 
things must end,' he said, 'but I would have you wait a little while longer: 
for  the end  of the deeds  that you have  shared in has not yet come. A day 
draws near that  I have looked for in all the years of my manhood,  and when 
it comes I would have my friends beside me.' But of that day he would say no 
more. 
     In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair house 
with Gandalf,  and  they went to and fro as  they  wished. And Frodo said to 
Gandalf:  'Do you know what this  day is that  Aragorn speaks of? For we are 
happy here, and I don't wish to go; but the days are running away, and Bilbo  
is waiting; and the Shire is my home.' 
     'As for  Bilbo,' said Gandalf, 'he is waiting for the same day, and  he 
knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is now only May 
and high summer is not yet in; and though all things may seem changed, as if 
an  age of the world had gone by,  yet to the trees and the grass it is less 
than a year since you set out.' 
     'Pippin,' said Frodo, 'didn't you say  that Gandalf was less close than 
of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is recovering.' 
     And Gandalf said: 'Many  folk  like to know beforehand what is to be set 
on the table; but those who have laboured  to prepare the feast like to keep 
their secret;  for  wonder makes the words of  praise  louder.  And  Aragorn 
himself waits for a sign.' 
     There came a day when  Gandalf could not  be  found, and  the Companions 

####-wondered what was going forward. But Gandalf took Aragorn  out from the 
City 
by night, and he brought him to the  southern feet  of Mount Mindolluin; and 
there they found a path made  in ages  past that few now dared to tread. For  
it led up on to the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had  been 
wont to go. And they went up by steep ways,  until they came to a high field 
below  the  snows that clad the  lofty peaks, and it  looked down  over  the 
precipice that stood behind the  City. And standing there they  surveyed the 
lands, for the  morning  was come; and they saw the towers  of the  City far 
below  them  like white pencils touched by the sunlight, and all the Vale of 
Anduin was like a  garden, and  the  Mountains  of Shadow  were veiled in  a 
golden mist. Upon the one side their  sight reached  to the grey Emyn  Muil,  
and  the  glint of  Rauros was like a star twinkling far  off; and upon  the 
other  side they  saw  the River like  a ribbon  laid down to Pelargir,  and 
beyond that was a light on the hem of the sky that spoke of the Sea. 
     And Gandalf said: 'This  is  your realm, and  the heart  of the greater  
realm that shall be. The Third Age of the world is ended, and the new age is 
begun; and it is your  task to order its beginning  and to preserve what may 
be preserved. For though much has been  saved, much must  now pass away; 
and 
the power  of the Three Rings also is ended. And all the lands that you see, 
and those that lie round about them, shall be dwellings of Men. For the time 
comes of the Dominion of Men, and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart.' 
     'I  know it well, dear  friend,' said Aragorn; 'but I would still  have 
your counsel.' 
     'Not for long now,' said Gandalf. 'The Third Age  was my age. I was the 
Enemy of Sauron; and my work  is finished. I shall go soon. The  burden must  
lie now upon you and your kindred.' 
     'But I  shall die,' said Aragorn. 'For  I  am a mortal man, and  though 
being what I am and of the race of the West unmingled, I shall have life far 
longer than other  men,  yet that is but a little while;  and when those who 
are now in the wombs of women are  born and have grown old, I too shall grow 
old.  And who then shall govern Gondor and those who look to this City as to 
their queen,  if my  desire be  not  granted? The Tree in the Court  of  the 
Fountain is still withered and barren. When shall  I see a sign that it will 
ever be otherwise?' 
     'Turn your face from the  green world, and look where all seems  barren 

####-and cold!' said Gandalf.  
     Then Aragorn  turned. and there was  a  stony  slope behind him running  
down from  the skirts of the snow; and as he looked he  was aware that alone 
there in the waste a growing thing stood. And he climbed to it, and saw that 
out of  the very edge  of the snow there sprang a sapling tree no  more than 
three  foot  high. Already it had  put forth young  leaves long and shapely, 
dark above and silver beneath,  and upon its slender crown it bore one small  
cluster of flowers whose white petals shone like the sunlit snow.  
     Then Aragorn cried:  'Yj! ut®vienyes! I  have found it!  Lo! here is  a  
scion  of the Eldest of Trees!  But how comes it here? For it  is not itself 
yet seven years old.' 
     And Gandalf coming  looked at it, and said: 'Verily this is a sapling of 
the line of  Nimloth the fair; and that was a seedling  of Galathilion,  and 
that a fruit of Telperion of  many names, Eldest of Trees. Who shall say how 
it comes here  in the appointed hour? But this is an ancient hallow, and ere 
the kings  failed or the Tree  withered in the court, a fruit must have been 
set here.  For it is said that, though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to 
ripeness, yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years, 
and none can foretell the time in which it will awake. Remember this. For if 
ever  a fruit ripens,  it should  be planted, lest  the  line die out of the 
world. Here it has lain. hidden on the mountain, even as the race of Elendil 
lay hidden in the wastes of the North. Yet the line of Nimloth is older  far 
than your line, King Elessar.' 
     Then Aragorn laid his hand  gently to the sapling, and lo! it seemed to 
hold only lightly to the earth, and it was removed without hurt; and Aragorn 
bore it back  to  the Citadel. Then the withered tree was uprooted, but with 
reverence; and they did not burn it, but laid it  to rest in the silence  of 
Rath Dnnen. And Aragorn planted the new tree in the  court by the  fountain, 
and swiftly and gladly it began to grow; and when the month  of June entered 
in it was laden with blossom. 
     'The sign has been given,'  said Aragorn, 'and the day is not far off.' 
And he set watchmen upon the walls.  
     It was the day  before Midsummer  when messengers came from Amon D(n 
to 
the  City,  and  they said that there was a  riding of fair folk out of  the 
North,  and they drew near now to  the walls of the Pelennor. And  the  King 
said: 'At last they have come. Let all the City be made ready!' 

####-     Upon the very Eve of Midsummer, when  the sky  was blue as sapphire and 
white stars opened in the East,  but the West was still  golden  and the air 
was  cool and  fragrant, the riders came down the North-way to the gates  of 
Minas Tirith. First rode Elrohir  and  Elladan with a  banner of silver, and 
then  came Glorfindel  and Erestor  and  all the household of Rivendell, and  
after them came the Lady Galadriel and Celeborn,  Lord of Lothlurien, riding 
upon white steeds and with  them many fair folk of their land,  grey-cloaked 
with  white  gems in their hair; and last came Master  Elrond, mighty  among 
Elves and Men, bearing the sceptre of Ann®minas,  and beside him upon a 
grey 
palfrey rode Arwen his daughter, Evenstar of her people. 
     And Frodo when he saw her come glimmering in the evening, with stars on 
her brow and a sweet fragrance about her,  was moved with  great wonder, and 
he said to Gandalf: 'At  last I  understand why we  have waited! This is the 
ending. Now not day only shall be beloved, but  night too shall be beautiful 
and blessed and all its fear pass away!' 
     Then  the  King welcomed  his  guests, and  they  alighted;  and Elrond 
surrendered  the sceptre, and  laid the hand of  his daughter in the hand of 
the King, and together they went up into  the  High City,  and a ll the stars 
flowered in the sky.  And  Aragorn the King Elessar wedded Arwen Undumiel 
in 
the City of the Kings upon the day of Midsummer, and  the tale of their long 
waiting and labours was come to fulfilment. 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. Many Partings 

 
 
     When the days of rejoicing were over at last the Companions  thought of 
returning to their own homes.  And Frodo went to the  King as he was sitting 
with the Queen Arwen by  the fountain, and she sang a song of Valinor, while 
the Tree grew and blossomed. They welcomed Frodo  and rose to greet him; 
and 
Aragorn said: 
     'I  know what you have come to say, Frodo: you wish to  return to  your 
own  home. Well, dearest friend,  the tree grows  best  in the  land of  its 
sires; but  for  you in  all  the lands of the  West  there will  ever  be a  
welcome. And though your people have had little fame in the  legends  of the 
great, they will  now have  more renown than  any wide  realms that  are  no 
more.' 
     'It  is true that  I  wish to  go back to the Shire,' said Frodo.  'But 
first I must  go to Rivendell.  For  if there could be anything wanting in a  
time so  blessed,  I missed Bilbo;  and  I was  grieved when  among all  the 
household of Elrond I saw that he was not come.' 
     'Do  you wonder at that,  Ring-bearer?' said  Arwen.  'For you know the 
power  of that thing  which is now destroyed; and  all that was done by that 
power is now passing away. But your kinsman possessed this thing longer than 
you.  He is ancient in years now, according to his kind; and  he awaits you, 
for he will not again make any long journey save one.' 
     'Then I beg leave to depart soon,' said Frodo. 
     'In seven days we will go,' said Aragorn. 'For we  shall ride  with you  
far on the road, even as far as  the  country  of Rohan.  In three days  now 
Jomer will return hither to bear Thjoden back to rest  in  the Mark, and  we 
shall ride  with  him to honour  the fallen.  But now before  you go  I will 
confirm the words that Faramir spoke to you, and you are made free  for ever 
of the realm of Gondor; and  all your companions likewise. And if there were 
any gifts that I could give to match with  your deeds you  should have them;  
but whatever you  desire you  shall  take  with you, and  you shall ride  in 
honour and arrayed as princes of the land.' 
     But the  Queen  Arwen  said:  'A  gift I will give  you.  For I  am the 
daughter  of Elrond. I shall not  go  with  him now when  he departs to  the 

####-Havens; for mine is the choice of L®thien, and as she so have I chosen, both 
the  sweet  and the bitter. But in  my stead you shall go, Ring-bearer, when 
the time  comes, and if you  then desire it. If your hurts grieve you  still 
and the memory of  your  burden is heavy, then  you may pass  into the West, 
until all your wounds and weariness  are hea led. But wear this now in memory 
of Elfstone and Evenstar with whom your life has been woven!' 
     And she took  a white gem like a star that lay upon her  breast hanging 
upon a silver chain,  and she  set the chain  about Frodo's neck.  'When the 
memory  of the  fear  and  the darkness troubles you,'  she said, 'this will 
bring you aid.' 
     In three days, as the King had said, Jomer  of Rohan came riding to the 
City, and with him came an  jored of the fairest knights  of the Mark. He was 
welcomed; and when they sat all  at table in Merethrond,  the  Great Hall of 
Feasts, he beheld the beauty of  the ladies that he  saw and was filled with 
great  wonder. And before  he went to his rest he sent for Gimli  the Dwarf, 
and he said to him: 'Gimli Gluin's son, have you your axe ready?' 
     'Nay,  lord,' said Gimli, 'but  I  can  speedily fetch it, if there  be 
need.' 
     'You  shall  judge,'  said  Jomer.  'For  there are  certain rash words 
concerning the Lady in the Golden  Wood that lie still between us. And now I 
have seen her with my eyes.' 
     'Well, lord,' said Gimli, 'and what say you now?' 
     'Alas!'  said Jomer. 'I will not say that she  is the fairest lady that 
lives.' 
     'Then I must go for my axe,' said Gimli. 
     'But first I will  plead this excuse,' said Jomer. 'Had  I seen  her in 
other company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now I will put 
Queen Arwen Evenstar first, and I  am ready to do battle on my own part with 
any who deny me. Shall I call for my sword?' 
     Then  Gimli bowed low.  'Nay, you are excused  for my  part, lord,'  he 
said. 'You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the Morning. And 
my heart forebodes that soon it will past away for ever.' 
     At last  the day of departure came, and a  great and fair  company made 
ready to ride  north from the City. Then the kings of Gondor and Rohan  went 
to the Hallows and they came  to the tombs in Rath Dnnen, and they bore away 
King Thjoden upon  a golden  bier,  and passed through the City  in silence.  
Then they laid the bier upon a great wain with  Riders of Rohan all about it 

####-and his banner borne before; and Merry being Thjoden's esquire rode upon the 
wain and kept the arms of the king. 
     For  the  other  Companions steeds  were furnished  according to  their 
stature; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn's side, and Gandalf rode upon 
Shadowfax, and Pippin rode with the knights of Gondor; and Legolas and 
Gimli 
as ever rode together upon Arod. 
     In that riding went  also Queen  Arwen, and Celeborn and Galadriel with 
their  folk,  and Elrond  and his sons; and the princes of Dol Amroth and of 
Ithilien, and many captains and knights. Never had any king of the Mark such 
company upon the road as went with Thjoden Thengel's  son to the land of his 
home. 
     Without haste and at peace they passed into Anurien,  and they came  to 
the  Grey  Wood under Amon  D(n; and  there they heard a sound  as  of drums 
beating in the hills, though no living thing could be seen. Then Aragorn let 
the trumpets be blown; and heralds cried: 
     'Behold  the King  Elessar is come! The Forest  of Dr®adan he  gives to 
Ghvn-buri-ghvn and to his folk, to be their own  for ever; and hereafter let 
no man enter it without their leave!' 
     Then the drums rolled loudly, and were silent. 
     At length after fifteen days of journey the wain of King Thjoden passed 
through the green  fields of Rohan and  came to Edoras;  and  there they all 
rested. The  Golden Hall  was arrayed  with fair hangings and it was  filled 
with light, and there was  held the highest feast that it had known since the 
days of its building. For after three days the Men  of the Mark prepared the 
funeral  of Thjoden; and  he was laid in a  house of stone with his arms and 
many  other  fair things that  he had possessed,  and over him was raised  a  
great mound, covered with green turves of grass and  of white evermind.  And 
now there were eight mounds on the east -side of the Barrowfield. 
     Then the Riders of the King's House  upon white horses rode round about 
the barrow and sang together a song of Thjoden Thengel's  son that  Gljowine 
his minstrel made,  and he made no  other song after. The slow voices of the 
Riders stirred the hearts even of those who did not  know the speech of that 
people; but the words of the song brought a light to the eyes of the folk of 
the Mark as they heard again afar the thunder of the hooves of the North and  
the voice of Eorl crying  above the battle upon the  Field of Celebrant; and 
the  tale  of  the kings rolled on, and the  horn  of Helm  was  loud in the 

####-mountains, until the Darkness  came and King Thjoden arose  and rode through 
the Shadow  to  the fire,  and died in splendour, even as the Sun, returning 
beyond hope, gleamed upon Mindolluin in the morning. 
     Out of doubt, out of dark, to the day's rising 
     he rode singing in the sun, sword unsheathing. 
     Hope he rekindled, and in hope ended; 
     over death, over dread, over doom lifted 
     out of loss, out of life, unto long glory. 
     But Merry stood at the foot of the green mound,  and he wept, and  when 
the song was ended he arose and cried: 
     'Thjoden King, Thjoden King!  Farewell! As a father you were to me. for  
a little while. Farewell!' 
     When the burial  was  over and the  weeping of  women was stilled,  and  
Thjoden was  left  at  last alone in his barrow, then folk gathered  to  the 
Golden Hall for the great feast and  put away sorrow;  for Thjoden had lived 
to full years  and ended in  honour no  less than the greatest of his sires.  
And when the time  came that in the  custom of the Mark they should drink to 
the memory of the kings, Jowyn  Lady of Rohan came  forth, golden as the sun 
and white as snow, and she bore a filled cup to Jomer. 
     Then a minstrel and loremaster stood up and  named all the names of the  
Lords of the Mark in their  order: Eorl the Young;  and Brego builder of the  
Hall; and Aldor brother of Baldor the hapless;  and Frja, and  Frjawine, and 
Goldwine, and Djor, and Gram; and Helm who lay  hid in Helm's Deep when  
the 
Mark was overrun; and so ended the nine mounds of the west-side, for in that 
time the  line  was  broken,  and after came  the  mounds of the  east-side: 
Frjalaf,  Helm s sister -son, and  Ljofa, and Walda, and Folca, and Folcwine,  
and Fengel, and Thengel, and Thjoden the latest. And when Thjoden  was 
named 
Jomer drained the  cup. Then Jowyn bade those  that served to fill the cups, 
and all  there assembled rose  and  drank to the  new  king, crying:  'Hail, 
Jomer, King of the Mark!' 
     At the  last when the  feast drew to an end Jomer arose and  said: 'Now 
this is the funeral feast of Thjoden the King; but I will speak ere we go of 
tidings of joy,  for  he would not grudge that I should do so, since he  was 
ever a father of Jowyn my sister. Hear then all my guests, fair folk of many 
realms, such  as  have never before  been gathered  in  this  hall! Faramir, 

####-Steward  of  Gondor, and Prince of  Ithilien, asks that  Jowyn Lady of Rohan 
should be his wife,  and she grants it full willing. Therefore they shall be 
trothplighted before you  all.' 
     And Faramir and Jowyn stood  forth and set hand in  hand; and all there 
drank to them  and were glad. 'Thus,'  said Jomer, 'is the friendship of the 
Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond, and the more do I rejoice.' 
     'No niggard are you, Jomer,' said Aragorn, 'to give  thus to Gondor the 
fairest thing in your realm!' 
     Then Jowyn looked in the eyes of Aragorn, and  she said: 'Wish  me joy,  
my liege-lord and healer!' 
     And he answered: 'I have wished  thee joy  ever since first I saw thee. 
It heals my heart to see thee now in bliss.' 
     When the feast was over, those who were to go took leave of King Jomer. 
Aragorn and his knights, and  the people  of Lurien  and of Rivendell,  made 
ready  to  ride;  but Faramir  and Imrahil  remained  at  Edoras; and  Arwen 
Evenstar remained also, and she said farewell  to her brethren. None saw her  
last meeting with Elrond  her father, for  they went up into the  hills  and 
there  spoke long together, and bitter was  their parting that should endure 
beyond the ends of the world. 
     At the last  before the guests set oat Jomer and  Jowyn came to  Merry, 
and  they said: 'Farewell now, Meriadoc of the  Shire  and Holdwine  of  the 
Mark! Ride to good fortune, and ride back soon to our welcome!' 
     And Jomer said: 'Kings of  old would  have laden you  with gifts that a  
wain could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg; and yet  you 
will take  naught,  you say, but the  arms that  were given to you.  This  I 
suffer, for indeed I have no gift that is  worthy; but my sister begs you to 
receive this small thing, as a memorial of Dernhelm and of the horns  of the  
Mark at the coming of the morning.' 
     Then  Jowyn gave to Merry  an ancient horn, small but cunningly wrought 
all of fair silver with a baldric of green; and wrights had engraven upon it 
swift horsemen riding in  a  line  that  wound about it from the tip  to the 
mouth; and there were set runes of great virtue. 
     'This is  an  heirloom of  our house,' said Jowyn. 'It was made  by the 
Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the  Worm. Eorl the Young 
brought 
it from the North. He that blows it  at need shall set fear in the hearts of 
his enemies and joy in the hearts of  his friends, and they  shall hear  him 

####-and come to him.' 
     Then Merry  took  the  horn, for it could not be refused, and he kissed 
Jowyn's hand; and they embraced him, and so they parted for that time. 
     Now the guests were  ready,  and  they drank the stirrup-cup, and  with 
great praise  and friendship they departed, and  came at  length  to  Helm's  
Deep, and there they rested two  days. Then Legolas  repaid  his  promise to 
Gimli and went with him to the  Glittering Caves;  and when they returned he 
was silent, and  would  say only that Gimli  alone could find fit  words  to 
speak of them. 'And never  before has  a Dwarf claimed a victory over an Elf 
in a contest of words,' said he. 'Now therefore let us go to Fangorn and set 
the score right!' 
     From  Deeping-coomb  they rode to Isengard,  and saw  how the Ents  had 
busied  themselves. All the stone-circle had been  thrown down and  removed, 
and  the land within was made into a garden  filled with orchards and trees,  
and a stream  ran through  it;  but in  the midst of all there was a lake of 
clear  water, and out of it  the  Tower  of  Orthanc  rose  still, tall  and 
impregnable, and its black rock was mirrored in the pool. 
     For a while the travellers sat where once the old gates of Isengard had 
stood, and there were now two tall trees like sentinels  a t the beginning of 
a green-bordered path that ran towards Orthanc; and they looked in wonder at 
the work that had been done, but no living thing could they see far or near. 
But presently they heard a voice calling hoom-hom, hoom-hom;  and there 
came 
Treebeard striding down the path to greet them with Quickbeam at his side. 
     'Welcome to the  Treegarth of Orthanc!' he said. 'I  knew that you were 
coming, but I was at work up the valley; there is much still to be done. But 
you  have  not been idle  either away in the south and the east, I hear; and 
all that I hear is good, very good.' Then Treebeard praised all their deeds,  
of which he seemed to have full knowledge; and at last he stopped and looked 
long at Gandalf. 
     'Well, come  now!' he said.  'You  have proved mightiest,  and all your 
labours have gone well.  Where now would you be  going? And why  do you 
come 
here?' 
     'To see how your work goes, my friend,' said Gandalf, 'and to thank you  
for your aid in all that has been achieved.' 
     'Hoom, well, that is fair enough,' said Treebeard; 'for to be sure Ents 

####-have played  their  part. And  not  only in  dealing with that,  hoom,  that 
accursed tree-slayer that dwelt here. For there was a great inrush of those, 
burbrum,   those  evileyed  -  blackhanded  -  bowlegged  -  flinthearted  - 
clawfingered  - foulbellied  -  bloodthirsty,  morimaite -  sincahonda,  hoom, 
well, since  you are  hasty folk and their full name is as long as  years of 
torment, those vermin  of orcs; and they came  over  the River a nd down from 
the  North and all round the wood of  Laurelindurenan, which they could  not 
get into, thanks  to the Great ones who  are here.' He bowed to the Lord and 
Lady of Lurien. 
     'And these same foul creatures were more than  surprised to meet us  out 
on the Wold, for they had  not heard of us before; though that might be said 
also of better folk. And not many  will remember us, for not many escaped us 
alive, and the River had most of those. But it was well for you, for if they 
had  not met us,  then the king of the grassland would not have  ridden far, 
and if he had there would have been no home to return to.' 
     'We know it  well,' said Aragorn, 'and never  shall it be forgotten  in 
Minas Tirith or in Edoras.' 
     'Never is too long a word even for me,' said Treebeard. 'Not while your 
kingdoms last, you mean; but they will have to last long indeed to seem long  
to Ents.' 
     'The New Age begins,' said Gandalf, 'and in this age it may  well prove 
that the  kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangor n my friend. But now come 
tell me: what of the task that I set you? How is Saruman? Is he not weary of 
Orthanc yet? For I do  not suppose that he will think you  have improved the 
view from his windows.' 
     Treebeard gave Gandalf a long look, a most cunning look, Merry thought. 
'Ah!'  he said.  'I thought you would come to  that. Weary of  Orthanc? Very 
weary  at last; but  not so weary of his tower as he  was weary of my voice. 
Hoom! I gave  him some long tales, or at least what might be thought long in 
your speech.' 
     'Then why  did he  stay  to  listen?  Did  you go into  Orthanc?' asked 
Gandalf. 
     'Hoom,  no, not  into Orthanc!'  said  Treebeard. 'But he came  to  his 
window and listened,  because he could  not get news in any  other  way, and 
though he hated the news, he was greedy to have it; and  I saw that he heard 
it all. But I added a great many things to the news that it was good for him 
to think of. He grew very weary. He always was hasty. That was his ruin.' 

####-     'l  observe, my good  Fangorn,' said Gandalf,  'that with great care you  
say dwelt, was, grew. What about is? Is he dead?' 
     'No, not dead, so far as I know,' said Treebeard. 'But he is gone. Yes, 
he is gone seven days.  I let him go.  There  was little left of him when he 
crawl ed  out,  and as  for  that worm-creature of his,  he was  like  a pale 
shadow. Now do not tell me, Gandalf, that I promised to keep him safe; for I  
know it.  But things have changed since then.  And  I kept him until  he was 
safe, safe from doing any  mor e harm. You should know that above all  I hate 
the  caging of live things, and I will not keep even such creatures as these 
caged beyond great need. A snake without fangs may crawl where he will.' 
     'You may be right,'  said Gandalf; 'but this snake  had still one tooth 
left, I think. He had the poison of his voice, and I guess that he persuaded 
you, even you Treebeard,  knowing the soft spot in your heart.  Well,  he is 
gone, and there is no more to be said.  But the Tower  of  Orthanc now  goes 
back to  the King, to whom it belongs. Though maybe he will not need it.' 
     'That  will  be seen later,' said Aragorn. 'But I will give to Ents all 
this valley  to  do with as they will, so long  as  they  keep a watch  upon 
Orthanc and see that none enter it without my leave.' 
     'It is locked,' said Treebeard. 'I made Saruman lock it and give me the 
keys. Quickbeam has them.' 
     Quickbeam  bowed like a tree bending in the wind and  handed to Aragorn 
two great black keys of intricate shape, joined by a  ring of steel.  'Now I 
thank you once more,' said Aragorn, 'and I bid you farewell. May your forest 
grow again in peace. When  this valley is filled there  is room and to spare 
west of the mountains, where once you walked long ago.' 
     Treebeard's face became sad. 'Forests may  grow,' he  said.  'Woods may 
spread. But not Ents. There are no Entings.' 
     'Yet maybe there is now more hope in your search,' said Aragorn. 'Lands 
will lie open to you eastward that have long been closed.' 
     But  Treebeard shook his head and said: 'It is far to go. And there are 
too  many Men there in these days. But I am forgetting  my manners! Will you  
stay here and rest a  while? And maybe there are  some that would be pleased 
to pass through Fangorn Forest and so shorten their road home?' He looked at 
Celeborn and Galadriel. 
     But  all  save Legolas said  that they  must  now take  their leave and 
depart, either south or west. 'Come, Gimli!' said Legolas. 'Now by Fangorn's 
leave I will visit the deep places of the Entwood and  see such trees as are 

####-nowhere  else  to be found in Middle-earth. You  shall come with me and keep 
your word; and thus we will journey on together to our own lands in Mirkwood 
and beyond.' To this Gimli agreed, though with no great delight, it seemed. 
     'Here  then  at last comes the ending of the Fellowship  of  the Ring,' 
said Aragorn. 'Yet I hope that ere long you will  return to my land with the 
help that you promised.' 
     'We will come, if our own lords allow it,' said Gimli. 'Well, farewell. 
my hobbits! You  should  come safe to your own homes now, and I shall not be 
kept  awake for fear  of your peril. We will send word when we may, and some 
of us  may yet meet at times; but I fear that we shall not all  be  gathered 
together ever again.' 
     Then Treebeard  said farewell to  each of  them  in turn, and  he bowed 
three times slowly and with great reverence to Celeborn and  Galadriel.  'It 
is long,  long since we  met by stock  or by  stone, A  vanimar,  vanimblion 
nostari!' he said. 'It is sad that we should meet only  thus at  the ending. 
For the world is changing: I  feel it in the  water, I feel it in the earth, 
and I smell it in the air. I do not think we shall meet again.' 
     And Celeborn said: 'I do not know, Eldest.' But Galadriel sa id: 'Not in 
Middle-earth, nor  until the lands  that lie  under the wave  are lifted  up 
again. Then in the  willow-meads  of  Tasarinan we may meet in  the  Spring. 
Farewell!' 
     Last of all Merry and Pippin said good-bye to the  old Ent, and he grew 
gayer as he looked at  them. 'Well, my merry folk,' he said, 'will you drink  
another draught with me before you go?' 
     'Indeed we  will,' they said,  and he took them aside into the shade of 
one  of the trees, and there they saw that  a  great stone jar had been set. 
And Treebeard  filled  three bowls, and they drank; and they saw his strange 
eyes looking at them over the  rim of his bowl. 'Take  care take  care!'  he 
said. 'For you have already grown  since I saw you last.'  And  they laughed 
and drained their bowls.  
     'Well, good-bye!' he said. 'And don't forget  that if you hear any news 
of the Entwives in your land, you  will send word to me.'  Then he waved his 
great hands to all the company and went off into the trees.  
 
     The  travellers now  rode with more  speed,  and  they made  their  way 
towards  the Gap of Rohan; and Aragorn took leave  of them at last  close to 
that  very place where  Pippin had looked  into  the Stone  of  Orthanc. The 

####-Hobbits were grieved at this parting; for Aragorn had never failed  them and 
he had been their guide through many perils.  
     'I wish  we  could have a Stone that  we could see all our friends in,' 
said Pippin, 'and that we could speak to them from far away!' 
     'Only  one  now remains  that you could use ,'  answered Aragorn for you  
would not wish to see what the Stone of Minas Tirith would show you. But the 
Palantnr of Orthanc the King will keep, to see what is passing in his realm, 
and what his servants are doing. For do not forget, Peregrin Took, that  you  
are a knight  of Gondor, and I do not release you from your service. You are 
going now on leave, but I may recall you.  And remember, dear friends of the 
Shire, that my realm  lies  also in the  North, and I shall  come there  one 
day.' 
     Then Aragorn took leave of Celeborn and Galadriel; and the Lady said to 
him: 'Elfstone,  through  darkness  you have come to your hope, and have now 
all your desire. Use well the days!' 
     But  Celeborn  said: 'Kinsman,  farewell! May  your doom be  other than 
mine, and your treasure remain with you to the end!' 
     With that they parted,  and  it was then the  time  of sunset; and when 
after  a  while  they turned and looked back,  they saw the King of the West 
sitting upon his horse with his knights about him; and the falling Sun shone 
upon them and made all  their harness to gleam like red gold,  and the white 
mantle of Aragorn  was turned  to a flame. Then Aragorn took the green stone 
and held it up, and there came a green fire from his hand. 
     Soon the dwindling company, following the  Isen,  turned west  and rode 
through  the  Gap  into  the  waste  lands  beyond,  and  then  they  turned 
northwards, and passed over the borders of Dunland. The Dunlendings fled and 
hid themselves, for they were afraid of Elv ish Folk,  though few indeed ever  
came to  their country; but the travellers  did not heed them, for they were 
still a great company and were well provided  with all that they needed; and  
they went  on  their way at their leisure, setting  up their tents when they 
would. 
     On the  sixth day  since their  parting  from the  King  they journeyed 
through  a wood  climbing  down from the  hills  at the  feet  of the  Misty 
Mountains that now marched on their right hand. As they came out  again into 
the open country at sundown they overtook an old man leaning on a staff, and 
he was clothed in rags of grey or dirty white, and at his heels went another  
beggar, slouching and whining. 

####-     'Well Saruman!' said Gandalf. 'Where are you going?' 
     'What is  that to  you?' he answered. 'Will you  still  order my goings,  
and are you not content with my ruin?' 
     'You know the  answers,' said Gandalf: 'no and no. But in  any case the 
time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has taken on the burden. If 
you had waited at Orthanc, you would have seen  him, and he would have 
shown 
you wisdom and mercy.' 
     'Then all the A more reason  to have left sooner,' said Saruman; 'for I 
desire  neither  of  him.  Indeed if  you wish for  an answer  to your first 
question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.' 
     'Then once  more you are going the wrong way,' said Gandalf, 'and I see 
no hope in your journey.  But  will  you scorn our help?  For we offer it to 
you.' 
     'To  me?' said  Saruman. 'Nay, pray do not smile  at me! I prefer  your 
frowns. And as  for the Lady here, I do not trust her:  she always hated me, 
and schemed  for your part. I do not doubt that she has brought you this way 
to have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty. Had  I been warned of your 
pursuit, I would have denied you the pleasure.' 
     'Saruman,' said Galadriel, 'we have other errands  and other cares that 
seem  to us more  urgent  than  hunting  for  you. Say rather  that  you are 
overtaken by good fortune; for now you have a last chance.' 
     'If it be truly the last, I am glad,'  said  Saruman;  'for I shall  be 
spared the  trouble of  refusing it  again. All  my hopes are ruined,  but I 
would not share yours. If you have any.' 
     For  a  moment his eyes kindled. 'Go!'  he said. 'I did   not spend long 
study on these matters for naught. You have  doomed yourselves, and you 
know 
it. And it will afford me  some comfort as I wander to think that you pulled 
down your own house  when you destroyed  mine. And now, what  ship will 
bear 
you back across so wide a sea?' he mocked. 'It will be a grey ship, and full 
of ghosts.' He laughed, but his voice was cracked and hideous.  
     'Get up, you  idiot!' he shouted to the other  beggar, who had sat down 
on the ground; and  he struck him with his staff. 'Turn about! If these fine 
folk are going our way, then we will  take another. Get on, or I'll give you  
no crust for your supper!' 

####-     The beggar  turned and slouched past  whimpering: 'Poor old Grnma! Poor  
old Grnma!  Always beaten and cursed. How  I hate him!  I wish I could leave 
him!' 
     'Then leave him!' said Gandalf.  
     But Wormtongue only shot a glance of his bleared eyes full of terror at 
Gandalf, and then shuffled quickly past behind Saruman. As the wretched pair 
passed  by the  company they came  to the hobbits, and Saruman  stopped  and 
stared at them; but they looked at him with pity. 
     'So you have  come  to  gloat too, have you, my urchins?' he said. 'You  
don't care what a beggar lacks, do you? For  you have all you want, food and 
fine clothes, and the best weed for your pipes. Oh yes, I know! I know where 
it comes from. You would not give a pipeful to a beggar, would you?' 
     'I would, if I had any,' said Frodo. 
     'You can have what I have  got left,' said Merry,  'if you will wa it  a  
moment.' He got down and searched  in  the bag at his saddle. Then he handed 
to Saruman a leather pouch.  'Take what there is,' he said. 'You are welcome 
to it; it came from the flotsam of Isengard.' 
     'Mine, mine, yes and dearly bought!' cried  Saruman,  clutching  at the 
pouch. 'This is only a repayment in token; for you took more, I'll be bound. 
Still,  a beggar must  be grateful,  if a thief returns him even a morsel of 
his own. Well, it  will serve you right  when you  come  home,  if  you find 
things  less good in  the Southfarthing than you  would like. Long  may your  
land be short of leaf!' 
     'Thank you!' said Merry. 'In that case I will have my pouch back, which 
is not yours and has journeyed  far with me.  Wrap the weed in a rag of your  
own.' 
     'One thief  deserves  another,' said  Saruman,  and turned his back  on 
Merry, and kicked Wormtongue, and went away towards the wood. 
     'Well, I  like that!' said Pippin. 'Thief indeed! What of our claim for  
waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?' 
     'Ah!' said Sam. 'And bought he said. How,  I  wonder? And I didn't like 
the sound of what he said about the Southfarthing. It's time we got back.' 
     'I'm sure it is,' said Frodo. 'But  we can't go  any quicker, if we are 
to see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell first, whatever happens.' 
     'Yes, I  think  you  had better do that,' said Gandalf. 'But  alas  for  
Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered altogether. 
All the same, I am not sure that  Treebea rd  is right: I  fancy he could  do 

####-some mischief still in a small mean way.' 
     Next day they went on into  northern Dunland, where  no men now  dwelt, 
though  it was  a green and pleasant country. September came  in with golden 
days  and  silver  nights, and they  rode  at  ease  until  they reached the 
Swanfleet  river, and  found the  old ford, east of the  falls where it went 
down suddenly into the lowlands. Far to the west in a haze lay the meres and 
eyots through which it wound its way to the Greyflood: there countless swans 
housed in a land of reeds. 
     So  they  passed into  Eregion,  and at last  a  fair  morning  dawned, 
shimmering above gleaming mists;  and looking from their camp on a  low hill 
the travellers saw away in the east the Sun catching three peaks that thrust  
up into the sky through floating clouds: Caradhras, Celebdil, and Fanuidhol.  
They were near to the Gates of Moria. 
     Here  now  for  seven  days they tarried, for the  time was at hand for  
another parting which  they  were loth to make.  Soon Celeborn and Galadriel 
and their folk would turn eastward, and so pass by the Redhorn Gate and down 
the  Dimrill Stair to the  Silverlode  and to  their own  country.  They had 
journeyed  thus far  by the  west -ways, for  they had  much  to speak of with 
Elrond and with Gandalf, and here they lingered still in converse with their 
friends.  Often long after the hobbits were wrapped in sleep  they would sit 
together under  the stars, recalling  the ages that were gone and  all their 
joys  a nd  labours in the world, or holding council, concerning  the days to 
come. If any wanderer had chanced  to  pass,  little would he  have seen  or  
heard, and it would have seemed to him only that he saw grey figures, carved 
in stone, memorials of forgotten  things now  lost in  unpeopled  lands. For 
they did  not move or speak with mouth, looking from mind  to mind; and only 
their shining eyes stirred and kindled as their thoughts went to and fro. 
     But at length all was said, and they parted again for a  while, until it 
was time for  the Three Rings to  pass away. Quickly fading into  the stones 
and  the  shadows  the  grey-cloaked  people  of  Lurien  rode  towards  the 
mountains;  and  those  who  were going  to  Rivendell sat  on the hill  and 
watched,   until there came out of the gathering mist a flash; and  then they 
saw no more. Frodo knew that Galadriel  had held aloft her ring  in token of 
farewell. 
     Sam turned away and sighed: 'I wish I was going back to Lurien!' 
     At last one  evening  they came over  the  high moors, suddenly  as  to 
travellers it always seemed,  to  the brink of the  deep valley of Rivendell 

####-and saw far below the lamps  shining  in Elrond's house. And they went  down 
and crossed the bridge and came to  the doors,  and all  the house was filled 
with light and song for joy at Elrond's homecoming. 
     First of  all, before  they  had  eaten or  washed  or even shed  their 
cloaks, the hobbits went in search of Bilbo. They found him all alone in his 
little room. It was littered with papers and pens and pencils; but Bilbo was 
sitting in  a  chair before  a small  bright fire. He looked  very old,  but 
peaceful, and sleepy. 
     He  opened his eyes and  looked up as they came in. 'Hullo, hullo!'  he 
said. 'So you've  come back? And  tomorrow's my birthday, too. How clever of 
you! Do you know,  I shall  be one hundred and twenty-nine? And  in one year 
more, if I am spared, I shall equal the Old Took. I should like to beat him; 
but we shall see.' 
     After the celebration  of  Bilbo's birthday  the four hobbits stayed in 
Rivendell for some days, and they sat much with  their old friend, who spent 
most  of his time  now in his room,  except at meals. For these he was still 
very punctual as a rule, and he seldom failed to wake  up in t ime  for them. 
Sitting round the fire they told him in turn all that they could remember of 
their journeys and adventures. At first he pretended to take some notes; but 
he often fell asleep; and when he  woke  he would  say:  'How splendid!  How 
wonderful!  But where were we?'  Then they went  on with  the story from the 
point where he had begun to nod. 
     The only  part that  seemed really to rouse him and  hold his attention 
was the account of  the crowning and marriage of Aragorn. 'I was  invited to  
the wedding of course,' he said. 'And I have  waited for it long enough. But 
somehow, when it came  to it,  I found I had so much to do here; and packing 
is such a bother.' 
     When  nearly a fortnight had passed Frodo  looked out of his window and 
saw that  there had been a frost  in the night, and  the  cobwebs were  like 
white  nets.  Then  suddenly he knew that he must go,  and  say  good-bye to 
Bilbo. The weather  was still calm  and fair, after one  of the  most lovely 
summers that people could remember; but October had  come, and it must 
break 
soon  and begin to rain and blow again. And there was still a very long  way 
to go. Yet it was not really the thought of the weather that stirred him. He 
had  a feeling  that  it  was time he went back to the Shire. Sam shared it. 
Only the night before he had said: 

####-     'Well, Mr. Frodo, we've been far and seen a deal, and yet I don't think  
we've found a better place than this. There's  something of everything here, 
if  you understand me:  the Shire and the Golden  Wood and  Gondor and kings' 
houses and  inns and  meadows and mountains all mixed.  And  yet, somehow, 
I 
feel we ought to be going soon. I'm worried about my gaffer, to tell you the 
truth.' 
     'Yes,  something  of  everything,  Sam,  except  the  Sea,'   Frodo  had 
answered; and he repeated it now to himself: 'Except the Sea.' 
     That  day  Frodo spoke to Elrond, and  it was  agreed  that they should 
leave the next morning. To their delight Gandalf said: 'I think I shall come 
too. At least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.' 
     In  the evening  they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. 'Well, if you must  
go, you must,' he said.  'I am sorry.  I shall miss you.  It is nice just to 
know that  you are about the  place. But I am getting very sleepy.' Then  he 
gave Frodo his mithril-coat  and Sting, forgetting that he had  already done 
so;  and  he gave him  also three books of lore that he had made  at various 
times,  written  in  his spidery hand,  and labelled  on  their  red  backs: 
Translations from the Elvish, by B.B. 
     To Sam he gave a little bag of gold. 'Almost the last drop of the Smaug 
vintage,' he  said.  'May come in  useful,  if you think of getting married, 
Sam.' Sam blushed. 
     'I have nothing  much to give to you young fellows,' he said   to  Merry 
and Pippin, 'except  good advice.'  And when he had given them a fair sample 
of  this, he added a last item in Shire-fashion:  'Don't let your heads  get 
too big for  your hats! But  if you don't  finish growing  up soon,  you are 
going to find hats and clothes expensive.' 
     'But if you want to  beat  the Old Took,' said Pippin, 'I don't see why 
we shouldn't try and beat the Bullroarer.' 
     Bilbo laughed, and he produced out of a pocket two beautiful pipes with 
pearl mouth-pieces and bound with fine-wrought silver.  'Think of me when you  
smoke them!' he said. 'The  Elves made them for  me, but I don't smoke now.' 
And then suddenly he nodded and went to sleep for a little; and when he woke 
up again he said: 'Now where were we? Yes, of course, g iving presents. Which 
reminds me: what's become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?' 
     'I have lost it, Bilbo dear,' said Frodo. 'I got rid of it, you know.' 
     'What a  pity!' said  Bilbo. 'I should have liked to see  it again. But 

####-no, how silly  of me! That's what you went for, wasn't it: to get rid of it?  
But it is all so confusing, for such a lot of  other things seem to have got 
mixed  up  with it: Aragorn's affairs, and the White Council and Gondor, and 
the Horsemen, and Southrons, and oliphaunts - did you really see one, Sam? - 
and caves and towers and golden trees, and goodness knows what besides. 
     'I  evidently came  back  by much too straight a  road from my trip.  I 
think Gandalf might have shown  me round  a bit. But then the  auction  would 
have been  over  before I got back,  and I should have had even more trouble 
than I  did. Anyway  it's  too  late  now; and really I think it's much more 
comfortable to sit  here and hear about it all.  The fire's  very cosy here, 
and the food's very good, and there are Elves when you want  them. What more 
could one want?  
     The Road goes ever on and on  
     Out from the door where it began. 
     Now far ahead the Road has gone, 
     Let others follow it who can! 
     Let them a journey new begin, 
     But I at last with weary feet 
     Will turn towards the lighted inn, 
     My evening-rest and sleep to meet.' 
     And  as Bilbo murmured the last words his head dropped on his chest and 
he slept soundly. 
     The evening deepened in the room,  and the  firelight  burned brighter; 
and they looked at Bilbo  as he slept and saw that his face was smiling. For  
some time they sat in silence; and then Sam  looking round  at  the room and 
the shadows flickering on the walls, said softly: 
     'I don't think, Mr. Frodo, that he's done much writing while we've been 
away. He won't ever write our story now.' 
     At that  Bilbo opened an eye, almost as if he had heard. Then he roused 
himself. 'You see, I am getting so  sleepy,' he said. 'And when I have  time 
to write, I only really like writing poetry. I wonder, Frodo my dear fellow,  
if you  would very much mind  tidying things up a bit before you go? Collect 
all my notes and  papers, and my diary too, and  take them with you, if  you  
will. You see, I haven't much time for the selection and the arrangement and 
all that.  Get Sam to help, and when you've knocked things into  shape, come 
back, and I'll run over it. I won't be too critical.' 
     'Of course I'll do it!' said Frodo. 'And of course I'll come back soon: 

####-it won't be dangerous any  more. There  is a real king now and he  will soon 
put the roads in order.' 
     'Thank  you, my dear fellow!' said Bilbo. 'That really is a  very great 
relief to my mind.' And with that he fell fast asleep again. 
     The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave  of Bilbo  in his room, 
for it was cold out of doors; and then they said farewell to Elrond  and all 
his household. 
     As Frodo stood upon  the threshold, Elrond  wished him  a fair journey, 
and blessed him, and he said: 
     'I think,  Frodo, that maybe you will not need to come back, unless you  
come  very soon. For  about this time of the year, when the  leaves are gold 
before they fall, look for Bilbo in  the woods of the Shire. I shall be with 
him.' 
     These wor ds no one else heard, and Frodo kept them to himself.  
 

####- 

Chapter 7. Homeward Bound 

 
 
     At last  the  hobbits had  their  faces  turned towards home. They were 
eager now to see the  Shire again; but at first they  rode  only slowly, for  
Frodo had been il l at  ease.  When they came to the  Ford of Bruinen, he had 
halted, and seemed loth  to ride into the stream; and they  noted that for a  
while his eyes appeared not to see them or things about him. All that day he  
was silent. It was the sixth of October. 
     'Are you in  pain,  Frodo?' said Gandalf quietly  as he rode by Frodo's 
side. 
     'Well, yes I am,' said Frodo. 'It is my shoulder. The  wound aches, and 
the memory of darkness is heavy on me. It was a year ago today.' 
     'Alas!  there  are  some  wounds  that  cannot be  wholly  cured,' said 
Gandalf. 
     'I  fear it may be so with  mine,'  said Frodo. 'There is no real going 
back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same; for I shall 
not  be the same.  I am  wounded  with  knife, sting,  and tooth, and a long 
burden. Where shall I find rest?' 
     Gandalf did not answer. 
     By the end of the next day  the pain and  unease had passed, and  Frodo 
was merry again, as merry as if he did not remember the blackness of the day 
before. After that the journey went well,  and the days went quickly by; for  
they rode  at leisure,  and often they lingered in the fair  woodlands where 
the leaves were red  and yellow  in the  autumn  sun. At length they came to  
Weathertop; and  it was then drawing  towards  evening and the shadow of the 
hill lay  dark  on the road. Then Frodo begged them to  hasten, and he would  
not look towards the hill,  but rode through its shadow with  head bowed and 
cloak drawn close about him. That night the weather changed, and a wind came 
from the  West laden with rain, and it blew loud and  chill,  and the yellow 
leaves whirled like birds in the air. When they came to the Chetwood already 
the boughs were almost bare, and a great  curtain  of rain  veiled Bree Hill 
from their sight. 
     So it was that near the end of a wild and wet  evening in the last days 
of October the  five travellers rode up  the  climbing road and came  to the 
South-gate of Bree.  It was locked fast; and the rain  blew in  their faces,  

####-and in the darkening sky low clouds went hurrying  by, and their hearts sank  
a little, for they had expected more welcome. 
     When they had called many times, at last  the Gate-keeper came out, and 
they saw that  he  carried a great cudgel. He looked at them  with  fear and 
suspicion; but  when he saw that Gandalf  was there, and that his companions 
were hobbits,  in spite of their strange gear, then he brightened and wished 
them welcome. 
     'Come in!' he said,  unlocking  the  gate. 'We  won't stay for news out 
here  in the  cold  and the wet, a ruffianly evening. But old Barley will no 
doubt give you a welcome at The Pony, and there you'll hear all there is  to 
hear.' 
     'And  there  you'll hear  later all  that  we say,  and  more,' laughed 
Gandalf. 'How is Harry? ' 
     The Gate-keeper scowled. 'Gone,' he said. 'But you'd best ask Barliman. 
Good evening!' 
     'Good  evening  to  you!' they said, and passed through; and then  they 
noticed  that  behind the  hedge at  the road-side a long low  hut had  been 
built, and a  number of  men had come out and were staring at  them over the 
fence. When they  came  to  Bill Ferny's house they saw that the hedge there 
was tattered and unkempt, and the windows were all boarded up. 
     'Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?' said Pippin. 
     'I'm not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam. 'But  I'd like to know what 
became  of that poor  pony. He's  been on my mind many a time and the wolves 
howling and all.' 
     At last they  came  to  The Prancing  Pony,  and that at  least  looked 
outwardly unchanged;  and  there were lights behind the red curtains  in the 
lower windows. They rang the bell, and Nob came to the door, and opened it a  
crack and peeped through; and when  he saw  them standing under the  lamp he 
gave a cr y of surprise. 
     'Mr. Butterbur! Master!' he shouted. 'They've come back!' 
     'Oh  have  they? I'll learn them,' came  Butterbur's voice, and out  he 
came with a rush, and he  had a club in his hand.  But when he  saw who they 
were he stopped short, a nd the black scowl on his face changed to wonder and 
delight. 
     'Nob,  you woolly-pated  ninny!'  he cried. 'Can't you give old friends 
their names? You shouldn't go scaring  me like that, with times as they are. 

####-Well, well! And where have you come from? I never expected to see any of 
you 
folk again, and that's a fact: going  off into the Wild with  that  Strider, 
and all those Black Men about. But I'm right glad to  see you, and none more 
than Gandalf. Come in! Come  in!  The same rooms as  - before? They're free. 
Indeed  most rooms  are empty  these  days, as I'll  not  hide from you, for  
you'll find it out soon enough. And I'll see what can be done  about supper, 
as soon as may be; but I'm short-handed at  present. Hey, Nob you slowcoach!  
Tell Bob! Ah, but there I'm forgetting, Bob's gone: goes home to his folk at 
nightfall now. Well, take the guests' ponies to the stables, Nob! And you'll 
be  taking your horse to his  stable yourself Gandalf; I don't doubt. A fine 
beast, as  I  said  when  I  first  set eyes  on  him.  Well, come in!  Make 
yourselves at home!' 
     Mr. Butterbur had at  any rate not  changed his manner  of talking, and 
still  seemed to live in his old breathless bustle. And yet there was hardly 
anybody about, and all  was  quiet; from the  Common  Room  there came a 
low 
murmur of no more than two or three voices. And seen  closer in the light of 
two  candles that he lit and carried before them the landlord's face  looked 
rather wrinkled and careworn. 
     He led them down the passage to the parlour that they  had used on that 
strange  night more  than  a  year  ago;  and  they  followed him,  a little 
disquieted,  for it seemed  plain  to them  that old Barliman was putting  a  
brave  face on some trouble.  Things were not what they  had been.  But they 
said nothing, and waited. 
     As  they expected Mr. Butterbur came to the parlour after supper to see 
if  all had been to their liking. As indeed  it had: no change for the worse 
had  yet come upon the beer  or the victuals at The Pony at any rate. 'Now I 
won't  make  so  bold as  to  suggest you should  come  to the  Common  Room 
tonight,' said Butterbur. 'You'll be tired; and there isn't many folk  there 
this evening, anyway. But if you could spare me half an  hour before you  go 
to  your beds, I would dearly like to have some talk with you, quiet-like by 
ourselves.' 
     'That  is  just what we should like,  too,'  said Gandalf. 'We  are not 
tired.  We have been taking things easy.  We were wet, cold and hungry,  but 
all  that you  have  cured.  Come, sit down!  And if you have any pipe-weed, 
we'll bless you.' 

####-     'Well, if you'd called  for anything else, I'd have been happier,' said 
Butterbur. 'That's just a thing that we're  short of, seeing how  we've only 
got  what we  grow ourselves,  and  that's not enough. There's none to be had 
from the Shire these days. But I'll do what I can.' 
     When he came back he brought them enough to last them for a day or two, 
a wad of uncut leaf.  'Southlinch,' he said, 'and the best  we have; but not 
the match of Southfarthing,  as I've always said though I'm all  for Bree in 
most matters, begging your pardon.' 
     They put him  in a large chair by the wood-fire, and Gandalf sat on the 
other side of the hearth, and the  hobbits  in low chairs between them;  and 
then they talked for many times half an hour, and exchanged all such news as 
Mr.  Butterbur wished to hear or give. Most of the  things which they had to  
tell were a mere  wonder and bewilderment to  their host, and far beyond his 
vision; and  they  brought forth few  comments other than: 'You  don't  say; 
often repeated in defiance of the evidence of Mr. Butterbur's own ears. 'You  
don't say, Mr. Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill? I'm getting so mixed up. You  
don't  say,  Master  Gandalf! Well I never!  Who'd  have  thought it in  our 
times!' 
     But he did say much on  his  own account. Things were far from well, he 
would say. Business was  not even fair, it was downright bad.  'No one comes 
nigh Bree  now from Outside,'  he said. 'And the inside  folks, they stay at 
home mostly and keep their doors barred. It all comes of those newcomers and 
gangrels that began coming up the Greenway  last year,  as you may remember; 
but  more came later. Some were just poor bodies running away from  trouble; 
but most were bad men, full o' thievery and  mischief. And there was trouble 
right here  in Bree, bad trouble. Why, we had a real set-to, and there  were 
some folk killed, killed dead! If you'll believe me.' 
     'I will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'How many?' 
     'Three  and two,' said  Butterbur,  referring to the big  folk  and the 
little. 'There was poor  Mat Heathertoes, and  Rowlie Appledore,  and little 
Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill; and  Willie Banks from up-away, and one of 
the Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and they're missed. And Harry 
Goatleaf that used to be on the West -gate, and that Bill Ferny, they came in 
on the strangers' side, and they've gone off  with them; and it's my  belief 
they let them in. On the night of the  fight, I  mean. And that was after we 
showed them the gates and  pushed them out: before the year's end, that was; 
and the fight was early in the New Year, after the heavy snow we had. 

####-     'And now they're gone for robbers and live outside, hiding in the woods 
beyond Archet, and out  in the wilds north-away. It's like a  bit of the bad 
old  times tales tell of, I say. It  isn't safe  on the road and nobody goes 
far, and folk lock up  early. We have to keep watchers all round  the  fence 
and put a lot of men on the gates at nights.' 
     'Well, no one troubled us,' said Pippin, 'and we came along slowly, and 
kept no watch. We thought we'd left all trouble behind us.' 
     'Ah, that you haven't, Master,  more's the pity,'  said Butterbur. 'But 
it's  no wonder they left  you a lone. They wouldn't go for  armed folk, with 
swords and helmets and  shields  and all. Make them think twice, that would. 
And I must say it put me aback a bit when I saw you.' 
     Then the hobbits suddenly realized  that people had looked at them with 
amazement  not out of surprise at their return so much as in wonder at their 
gear.  They  themselves  had  become  so  used to warfare and  to  riding in 
well-arrayed  companies  that they had quite  forgotten that the bright mail 
peeping from  under their cloaks, and the helms of Gondor and the Mark,  and 
the  fair devices  on  their  shields,  would seem  outlandish in  their own 
country. And Gandalf, too, was now  riding on his tall grey  horse, all clad 
in white with a great mantle of blue and silver over all, and the long sword 
Glamdring at his side. 
     Gandalf  laughed. 'Well,  well,'  he  said, 'if they are afraid of just 
five of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But  at any  rate 
they will give you peace at night while we stay.' 
     'How long will that be?' said Butterbur.  'I'll  not deny we  should be 
glad to have you about for a bit. You see, we're not used to  such troubles; 
and  the  Rangers have all gone  away,  folk tell  me.  I don't  think we've 
rightly understood  till  now what  they did for us. For there's  been worse 
than robbers about.  Wolves  were howling round  the fences last winter. And 
there's  dark shapes in the woods, dreadful  things that it makes the  blood 
run cold to think of. It's been very disturbing, if you  understand me.' 
     'I expect it has,' said Gandalf. 'Nearly all  lands have been disturbed 
these days, very disturbed. But cheer up,  Barliman!  You  have been  on the 
edge  of very great troubles, and I  am only glad to hear that  you have not 
been  deeper in.  But  better times are  coming. Maybe,  better than any you  
remember. The Rangers have returned. We came back with them.  And there is 
a 
king again, Barliman. He will soon be turning his mind this way. 

####-     'Then the Greenway will  be opened again , and his  messengers will come 
north,  and  there will  be comings and  goings, and the evil things will be 
driven out of  the waste-lands. Indeed the  waste in  time will be  waste no 
longer,  and  there   will  be  people  and  fields  where  once  ther e  was 
wilderness.' 
     Mr. Butterbur shook his head. 'If there's a few decent respectable folk  
on the roads, that  won't do no harm,' he said. 'But  we  don't want no more 
rabble and ruffians. And  we don't want no outsiders at Bree, nor  near Bree 
at all. We want to be let alone.  I  don't want a  whole  crowd o' strangers 
camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.' 
     'You will be let  alone, Barliman,' said Gandalf. 'There is room enough 
for realms between Isen and Greyflood, or  along the shore lands south of the  
Brandywine, without any one living within many days' ride of  Bree. And many 
folk used to dwell away north, a hundred miles or more from here, at the far  
end of the Greenway: on the North Downs or by Lake Evendim.' 
     'Up away by Deadmen's Dike?' said Butterbur, looking even more dubious.  
'That's haunted land, they say. None but a robber would go there.' 
     'The Rangers go  there,' said Gandalf.  'Deadmen's Dike, you say. So it 
has  been called for long years;  but its right  name, Barliman, is  Fornost  
Erain, Norbury of the Kings. And the King will come there again one day; and 
then you'll have some fair folk riding through.' 
     'Well,  that sounds more hopeful, I'll  allow,' said Butterbur. 'And it 
will be good for  business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.' 
     'He will,' said Gandalf. 'He knows it and loves it.' 
     'Does he now?' said Butterbur looking puzzled. 'Though I'm sure I don't 
know  why  he  should, sitting  in his  big  chair up in his  great   castle, 
hundreds  of miles away. And drinking wine out of a  golden cup, I shouldn't 
wonder.  What's  The Pony to him, or mugs  o'  beer? Not  but what my beer's 
good, Gandalf. It's been uncommon good, since you came in the autumn of last  
year and put a good word on it. And that's been a comfort in trouble, I will 
say.' 
     'Ah!' said Sam. 'But he says your beer is always good.' 
     'He says?' 
     'Of course he does. He's Strider. The chief of the Rangers. Haven't you  
got that into your head yet?' 
     It went in at last, and  Butterbur's face was  a study in  wonder.  The 
eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and he gasped. 

####-'Strider!' he exclaimed when he  got back his breath.  'Him with a crown and 
all and a golden cup! Well, what are we coming to?' 
     'Better times, for Bree at any rate,' said Gandalf.  
     'I hope so, I'm sure,' said Butterbur. 'Well, this  has been the nicest  
chat I've  had  in  a month of  Mondays. And  I'll not deny that I'll  sleep 
easier  tonight and with a lighter heart. You've given  me a powerful lot to 
think over, but  I'll put that off until tomorrow. I'm  for bed, and I've no 
doubt  you'll be glad  of your beds too. Hey, Nob!' he called, going to  the 
door.  'Nob, you slowcoach!' 
     'Now!' he said to himself, slapping his  forehead. 'Now what  does that 
remind me of?' 
     'Not  another letter  you've forgotten. I hope,  Mr.  Butterbur?'  said 
Merry. 
     'Now, now, Mr.  Brandybuck, don't go reminding me of  that! But  there,  
you've  broken my  thought. Now where was I? Nob,  stables, ah! that was it. 
I've something that  belongs to  you.  If you recollect Bill  Ferny  and the 
horsethieving: his pony as you bought,  well,  it's  here. Come  back all of 
itself, it did. But where it had been to you know better than me. It was  as 
shaggy as an old dog and as lean as a clothes-rail, but it  was alive. Nob's 
looked after it.' 
     'What! My Bill?' cried Sam. 'Well, I was born lucky, whatever my gaffer  
may say. There's another  wish come true! Where is he?' Sam  would not go to 
bed until he had visited Bill in his stable. 
     The travellers stayed in Bree all the next day, and Mr. Butterbur could 
not complain of his  business next evening at any  rate. Curiosity  overcame  
all fears,  and his house was  crowded.  For a while  out of politeness  the 
hobbits  visited the Common  Room in the evening  and  answered a  good 
many 
questions. Bree memories being retentive,  Frodo was  asked many times if he 
had written his book. 
     'Not yet,' he answered. 'I am going home now to put my notes in order.' 
He promised to deal  with the amazing events at Bree, and so  give a bit  of 
interest to  a book that appeared likely to  treat mostly of  the remote and 
less important affairs 'away south'.  
     Then  one of  the  younger folk called for  a song. But at that a  hush 
fell,  and he was frowned  down,  and the  call  was not repeated. Evidently 
there was no wish for any uncanny events in the Common Room again. 

####-     No trouble by day, nor  any sound by night, disturbed the peace of Bree 
while the travellers remained there; but the next morning they got up early, 
for  as the  weather  was still rainy they wished to reach the  Shire before 
night, and it was a long ride. The Bree folk were  all out  to see them off,  
and were in merrier mood than they had  been  for a year; and  those who had 
not seen the  strangers in all  their gear before gaped with wonder at them: 
at Gandalf with his white beard,  and  the light that  seemed to  gleam from 
him, as if his  blue mantle was on ly a  cloud over sunshine; and at the four 
hobbits like riders upon errantry out of almost  forgotten tales. Even those 
who had laughed at all the talk about the King began to think there might be 
some truth in it. 
     'Well, good luck on your road,  and good luck to your home-coming! said 
Mr. Butterbur. 'I  should have warned you before that  all's not well in the 
Shire neither, if what we  hear is true.  Funny goings on, they say. But one 
thing drives out another, and I was full of my own troubles. But i f I may be 
so  bold, you've come back  changed from your travels, and you look now like 
folk as  can deal with troubles  out of hand. I don't  doubt you'll soon set 
all to rights. Good  luck to you! And the  oftener you  come back the better  
I'll be pleased.' 
     They wished  him  farewell  and  rode  away,  and  passed  through  the 
West-gate and on  towards  the  Shire. Bill the  pony was with them, and  as 
before he  had a  good deal of  baggage, but he trotted along beside Sam and 
seemed well content. 
     'I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,' said Frodo. 
     'I can guess some of it,' said Sam gloomily. 'What I saw in the Mirror: 
trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the Row.  I ought to 
have hurried back quicker.' 
     'And something's wrong  with the Southfarthing evidently,'  said Merry. 
'There's a general shortage of pipe-weed.' 
     'Whatever it  is,' said Pippin, 'Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you  
can be sure of that.' 
     'Deep in,  but not at the bottom,' said Gandalf.  'You  have  forgotten 
Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did.' 
     'Well,  we've  got you  with us,' said Merry,  'so things  will soon be 
cleared up.' 
     'I am with you at  present,' said Gandalf, 'but soon I  shall not be. I 
am not coming to the Shire. You must  settle its affairs yourselves; that is 

####-what  you have been trained for. Do you not yet understand? My time is over: 
it is no longer my  task to set things to rights, nor to help folk to do so. 
And  as for you ,  my dear friends, you will need no  help. You are  grown up 
now. Grown indeed very high; among the  great you are,  and I have no longer  
any fear at all for any of you. 
     'But if you would know, I am turning aside soon.  I  am going to have a  
long talk with Bombadil: such a talk as I have not had in all my time. He is 
a moss-gatherer, and I have been a  stone doomed to rolling. But  my rolling 
days are ending, and now we shall have much to say to one another.' 
     In a little while  they came to the point on the East  Road  where they 
had taken  leave of  Bombadil; and  they hoped and  half expected to see him 
standing there to greet them as they went by. But there was no sign  of him; 
and  there was  a grey mist on the Barrow-downs southwards, and  a deep veil 
over the Old Forest far away. 
     They halted and Frodo looked south wistfully. 'I should dearly  like to 
see the old fellow again,' he said. 'I wonder how he is getting on?' 
     'As well as ever, you may be sure,' said Gandalf. 'Quite untroubled and 
I  should guess, not much interested in anything  that we have done or seen, 
unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents. There may be a time  later for you  
to go and see him. But if I were you, I should press on now for home, or you  
will not come to the Brandywine Bridge before the gates are locked.' 
     'But there aren't any  gates,' said  Merry, 'not  on the Road; you know 
that quite well.  There's  the  Buckland Gate, of course; but they'll let me 
through that at any time.' 
     'There  weren't any  gates,  you mean,'  said Gandalf. 'I think you will 
find some  now. And  you might have  more trouble even  at the Buckland Gate 
than you think. But you'll! manage all right. Good -bye dear friends! Not for  
the last time, not yet. Good-bye!' 
     He turned Shadowfax off the  Road, and the great horse leaped the green 
dike that here ran beside  it;  and then at a cry from Gandalf he  was gone, 
racing towards the Barrow-downs like a wind from the North. 
     'Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together,' said 
Merry. 'We have left all the rest behind, one after another. It seems almost  
like a dream that has slowly faded.' 
     'Not to  me,'  said  Frodo. 'To me it  feels  more  like falling asleep 
again.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 8. The Scouring of the Shire 

 
 
     It was after nightfall when, wet and tired, the travellers came at last  
to  the Brandywine, and  they found  the way  barred. At  either  end of the 
Bridge there was a great  spiked gate;  and on the further side of the river  
they could see that some new houses had been built: two-storeyed with narrow 
straight-sided   windows,  bare   and   dimly  lit,  all  very   gloomy  and 
un-Shirelike. 
     They  hammered on  the outer gate and called, but there was at first no  
answer;  and then to their  surprise someone blew a horn, and  the lights in 
the windows went out. A voice shouted in the dark: 
     'Who's that?  Be off! You  can't come in: Can't you read the notice: No 
admittance between sundown and sunrise?' 
     'Of  course we can't read the notice  in the  dark.' Sam shouted  back. 
'And if hobbits of the Shire are to be  kept out in the wet on  a night like 
this, I'll tear down your notice when I find it.' 
     At that a  window slammed, and a crowd  of hobbits with lanterns poured  
out of the house on the  left. They opened the  further gate, and some  came 
over the bridge. When they saw the travellers they seemed frightened. 
     'Come along!' said Merry, recognizing one of the hobbits. 'If you don't 
know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I should 
like 
to know what  all this is  about,  and  what a Bucklander  like you is doing 
here. You used to be on the Hay Gate.' 
     'Bless  me!  It's Master Merry, to  be sure,  and all  dressed  up  for  
fighting!'  said  old Hob. 'Why,  they  said you was  dead! Lost in  the Old 
Forest by all accounts. I'm pleased to see you alive after all!' 
     'Then  stop gaping  at  me  through the  bars, and open the gate!' said 
Merry. 
     'I'm sorry, Master Merry, but we have orders.' 
     'Whose orders?' 
     'The Chief's up at Bag End.' 
     'Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotho?' said Frodo. 
     'I suppose  so,  Mr.  Baggins;  but  we have  to say  just  "the Chief" 
nowadays.' 

####-     'Do you indeed!'  said  Frodo. 'Well,  I am  glad he  has  dropped  the 
Baggins at any  rate. But  it is evidently high  time that the  family dealt 
with him and put him in his place.' 
     A  hush fell  on the hobbits  beyond the  gate. 'It  won't do  no  good 
talking that  way,' said one. 'He'll  get to hear  of it. And if you make so 
much noise, you'll wake the Chief's Big Man.' 
     'We shall wake him up in a way that will surprise him,' said Merry. 'If 
you mean that your precious Chief has  been hiring ruffians out of the wild, 
then we've not come back too  soon.' He sprang from his pony, and seeing the 
notice in  the light of the lanterns, he  tore it down and threw it over the 
gate. The  hobbits  backed  away and  made no move  to open  it.  'Come  on, 
Pippin!' said Merry. 'Two is enough.' 
     Merry and Pippin  c limbed the gate, and the hobbits fled.  Another horn 
sounded. Out of the bigger house on the right a large heavy figure  appeared 
against a light in the doorway. 
     'What's all this,' he snarled as he  came  forward. 'Gate-breaking? You  
clear out, or I'l l break your filthy little necks!' Then he  stopped, for he 
had caught the gleam of swords. 
     'Bill Ferny,' said Merry, 'if you don't open that gate in ten  seconds,  
you'll regret it. I shall set steel  to you, if you don't obey. And when you  
have opened the gates you will go  through  them and never return. You are a 
ruffian and a highway-robber.' 
     Bill  Ferny flinched and shuffled to the gate and unlocked it. 'Give me 
the key!' said Merry. But  the ruffian flung it  at his head and then darted 
out into the darkness. As he  passed the ponies one of them let fly with his 
heels  and just caught him as he ran. He went off with a yelp into the night 
and was never heard of again. 
     'Neat work, Bill,' said Sam, meaning the pony. 
     'So much for your  Big Man,' said Merry. 'We'll see the Chief later. In 
the meantime we want a lodging for the night, and as you seem to have pulled 
down the Bridge Inn and built  this dismal place instead, you'll have to put 
us up.' 
     'I am sorry, Mr. Merry,' said Hob, 'but it isn't allowed.' 
     'What isn't allowed?' 
     Taking in folk off-hand like and eating extra food, and  all that, said 
Hob. 
     'What's the  matter  with the place?'  said Merry. 'Has it  been a  bad 

####-year, or what? I thought it had been a fine summer and harvest.' 
     'Well no, the year's been good enough,'  said  Hob. 'We grows a lot  of 
food,  but  we  don't  rightly  know what  becomes  of  it.  It's all  these 
"gatherers" and "sharers", I reckon, going round counting and measuring  and 
taking off to storage. They do more gathering than sharing, and we never see 
most of the stuff again.' 
     'Oh  come!' said  Pippin yawning.  'This  is all too  tiresome  for  me 
tonight.  We've  got food in our bags.  Just give  us a room to lie down in. 
It'll be better than many places I have seen.' 
     The hobbits at the gate still seemed ill  at  ease, evidently some rule 
or other was being broken;  but there was no gainsaying four such  masterful 
travellers, all armed, and two of them uncommonly  large and strong-looking. 
Frodo ordered the gates to be locked again. There was some sense at any rate 
in  keeping  a  guard,  while  ruffians  were  still about.  Then  the  four 
companions   went  into  the  hobbit  guard-house  and  made  themselves  as 
comfortable as they  could. It was a bare and ugly place, with a mean little 
grate that would not allow a good fire. In the upper  rooms were little rows 
of  hard  beds, and on every wall  there was  a notice and a list  of Rules. 
Pippin tore them down. There was no beer and very little food, but with what 
the travellers brought and shared out they all made a  fair meal; and Pippin 
broke Rule 4 by putting most of next day's allowance of wood on the fire. 
     'Well now,  what  about a  smoke,  while  you tell  us  what  has  been 
happening in the Shire?' he said. 
     'There isn't  no pipe-weed  now,' said  Hob; 'at  least  only  for  the 
Chief's  men. All the stocks seem to have gone. We do hear that waggon-loads 
of  it went away down the  old road out of the Southfarthing, over Sarn Ford 
way. That would  be the end  o' last year, after you left.  But it  had been 
going away quietly before that, in a small way. That Lotho--' 
     'Now you  shut up, Hob Hayward!' cried several of the others. 'You know 
talk o' that sor t isn't allowed. The Chief will hear of it, and we'll all be 
in trouble.' 
     'He wouldn't hear naught, if some of you here weren't sneaks,' rejoined 
Hob hotly. 
     'All right, all right!' said Sam. "That's quite enough. I don't want to 
hear no more. No welcome, no beer, no smoke, and a lot of rules and orc-talk 
instead.  I  hoped  to have a rest, but I can see there's work  and  trouble 
ahead. Let's sleep and forget it till morning!' 

####-     The new  'Chief' evidently had  means of getting news. It  was  a  good 
forty miles from  the Bridge to Bag End,  but someone made the journey  in a 
hurry. So Frodo and his friends soon discovered. 
     They had not made any definite plans, but  had vaguely thought of going  
down to Crickhollow together first, and resting there a bit. But now, seeing 
what things  were like, they decided to go straight to Hobbiton. So the next 
day they  set out  along  the Road and jogged  along  steadily. The wind had 
dropped but the sky was grey. The land looked rather sad and forlorn; bu t it 
was after all the first of  November and the fag-end of Autumn. Still  there 
seemed  an unusual  amount of burning  going  on, and  smoke rose  from many 
points  round  about.  A great cloud of  it  was  going up  far  away in the 
direction of the Woody End. 
     As evening fell they were  drawing near to  Frogmorton, a village right 
on the Road, about  twenty -two  miles  from the Bridge. There  they meant to 
stay  the night; The Floating Log at  Frogmorton was a good inn. But as they  
came to the  east  end of the village they met a barrier with  a large  board 
saying NO ROAD; and behind it stood a large band of Shirriffs with staves in 
their hands  and  feathers in their caps,  looking both important and rather  
scared. 
     'What's all this?' said Frodo, feeling inclined to laugh. 
     This is  what it is, Mr. Baggins, said  the leader  of the Shirriffs, a  
two-feather hobbit: 'You're arrested for  Gate-breaking,  and  Tearing up of 
Rules,  and  Assaulting  Gate-keepers,  and  Trespassing,  and  Sleeping  in 
Shire-buildings without Leave, and Bribing Guards with Food.' 
     'And what else?' said Frodo. 
     'That'll do to go on with,' said the Shirriff-leader. 
     'I  can add some more, if  you like it,' said Sam. 'Calling your  Chief 
Names, Wishing to punch his Pimply Face, and Thinking you  Shirriffs look  a  
lot of Tom-fools.' 
     'There now, Mister, that'll do.  It's the Chief's orders that you're to 
come  along quiet. We're going to  take you to Bywater and hand  you over to 
the Chief's Men; and when he deals with your case you can have your say. But 
if  you don't want  to  stay in the  Lockholes any longer than you  need,  I 
should cut the say short, if I was you.' 
     To  the  discomfiture  of  the Shirriffs  Frodo  and his companions all 
roared with laughter.  'Don't  be absurd!' said Frodo.  'I am  going where I 
please, and in my own time. I happen to be going to Bag End on business, but 

####-if you insist on going too, well that is your affair.' 
     'Very  well, Mr. Baggins,' said the  leader, pushing the barrier aside. 
'But don't forget I've arrested you.' 
     'I won't,'  said Frodo. 'Never.  But  I may forgive  you. Now I am  not 
going any  further today, so if you'll kindly escort me to The Floating Log, 
I'll be obliged.' 
     'I   can't  do   that,  Mr.  Baggins.  The  inn's   closed.  There's  a  
Shirriff-house at the far end of the village. I'll take you there. ' 
     'All right,' said Frodo. 'Go on and we'll follow.' 
     Sam had been looking the Shirriffs up and down and had spotted one that 
he knew.  'Hey, come here  Robin Smallburrow!' he called.  'I want a word with 
you.' 
     With a sheepish glance at his leader, who looked  wrathful but did  not  
dare to interfere, Shirriff Smallburrow fell back and walked beside Sam, who 
got down off his pony. 
     'Look here, Cock -robin!' said  Sam. 'You're Hobbiton-bred and ought  to 
have more sense,  coming a -waylaying Mr. Frodo and all.  And what's all this 
about the inn being closed?' 
     'They're all closed,' said Robin.  'The  Chief  doesn't hold with beer. 
Leastways  that is how it started. But now I reckon it's his Men that has it 
all.  And he  doesn't  hold with folk moving about; so if they  will or they 
must, then they has to go to the Shirriff-house and explain their business.' 
     'You  ought to   be ashamed of  yourself having anything to do with such 
nonsense,' said Sam. 'You used to like the inside of an inn better than  the 
outside yourself. You were always popping in, on duty or off.' 
     'And so I would be still,  Sam,  if I  could. But don't be  hard on me. 
What  can I  do? You know  how I went for a Shirriff seven years ago, before 
any of this began. Gave me a chance of walking round the  country and seeing 
folk, and hearing the news,  and knowing where the  good beer was.  But  now 
it's different.' 
     'But you can give it  up,  stop Shirriffing, if it has  stopped being a  
respectable job,' said Sam. 
     'We're not allowed to,' said Robin. 
     'If  I hear  not allowed much oftener,' said  Sam, 'I'm  going  to  get 
angry.' 
     'Can't say as I'd be sorry to see  it,'  said Robin lowering his voice. 
'If we  all got angry together something might be done. But  it's these Men, 

####-Sam, the Chief's Men. He sends them round everywhere, and if any of us small 
folk stand  up for our rights, they drag him off to the Lockholes. They took  
old Flourdumpling, old Will Whitfoot the Mayor,  first,  and they've taken a  
lot more. Lately it's been getting worse. Often they beat 'em now.' 
     'Then  why do you do their work far them?' said Sam  angrily. 'Who sent 
you to Frogmorton?' 
     'No one did. We stay  here in the big  Shirriff-house. We're the  First 
Eastfarthing Troop now. There's hundreds of Shirriffs all told and they want  
more, with  all these new rules. Most of them  are in it against their will, 
but not all. Even in  the Shire there are some as like  minding other folk's 
business and talking big. And there's worse than  that: there's a  few as do 
spy-work for the Chief and his Men.' 
     'Ah! So that's how you had news of us, is it?' 
     'That's right. We  aren't allowed to send by it  now, but they use  the 
old Quick Post service,  and keep  special runners at  different points. One 
came in  from  Whitfurrows  last  night with a "secret message", and another  
took it on from  here. And a message came back this afternoon saying you was 
to be  arrested and taken to Bywater, not direct to the Lockholes. The Chief 
wants to see you at once, evidently.' 
     'He won't be so eager when Mr. Frodo has finished with him,' said Sam. 
     The Shirriff-house at Frogmorton was as bad as the Bridge-house. It had 
only one storey,  but it  had the  same narrow windows, and it was built  of 
ugly pale bricks,  badly laid. Inside  it was damp and cheerless, and supper 
was served on a long  bare table that  had not been scrubbed  for weeks. The 
food  deserved no better  setting. The travellers  were  glad  to  leave the 
place.  It was about eighteen  miles to  Bywater,  and they  set off at  ten 
o'clock  in the morning. They  would have started earlier, only the delay so 
plainly annoyed the Shirriff-leader. The west wind had shifted northward and 
it was turning colder, but the rain was gone. 
     It was rather  a comic  cavalcade that left the village, though the few 
folk that came out to  stare at the  'get-up' of the travellers did not seem 
quite sure whether laughing was allowed. A dozen Shirriffs had been told off 
as escort to the  'prisoners'; but Merry made  them  march  in front,  while 
Frodo and his friends rode behind. Merry, Pippin, and  Sam sat at their ease 
laughing and talking  and singing, while the Shirriffs stumped along  trying 
to  look stern and important. Frodo, however, was  silent  and looked rather  
sad and thoughtful. 

####-     The last person  they passed was a sturdy  old gaffer clipping a hedge. 
'Hullo, hu llo!' he jeered. 'Now who's arrested who?' 
     Two of the Shirriffs immediately  left the  party and went towards him. 
'Leader!' said  Merry. 'Order your  fellows back to their places at once, if 
you don't want me to deal with them!' 
     The two hobbits at a sharp word from the leader came back sulkily. 'Now 
get on!' said Merry,  and after that  the  travellers  saw  to it that their 
ponies'  pace was quick enough to  push  the Shirriffs along as fast as they 
could go. The sun came out,  and in spite of the  chilly wind they were soon  
puffing and sweating. 
     At  the Three-Farthing  Stone they  gave  it  up.  They had done nearly 
fourteen  miles with only one rest  at noon. It was now three  o'clock. They 
were hungry and very footsore and they could not  stand the pace. 
     'Well, come along in your own time!' said Merry. 'We are going on.' 
     'Good-bye, Cock -robin!' said Sam. 'I'll wait for you outside  The Green 
Dragon, if you haven't forgotten where that is. Don't dawdle on the way!' 
     'You're  br eaking  arrest,  that's what you're doing,'  said the leader  
ruefully, 'and I can't be answerable.' 
     'We shall  break  a  good many things  yet, and not ask you to answer ' 
said Pippin. 'Good luck to you!' 
     The  travellers trotted on, and as the  sun began to  sink towards  the 
White Downs far away on the western horizon they came to Bywater by its 
wide 
pool; and there  they had their first really  painful shock. This  was Frodo 
and Sam's own country, and they found out  now that they cared about it  more 
than any other place in  the world. Many  of  the houses that they had known  
were missing. Some seemed to  have been burned down. The pleasant row of 
old 
hobbit-holes in the  bank on the north  side  of the Pool were deserted, and 
their little  gardens that used to run down bright to the water's  edge were 
rank with weeds. Worse,  there was a whole line  of the ugly new houses  all 
along Pool Side, where the Hobbiton Road ran close to the bank. An avenue of 
trees had stood there. They were all  gone.   And  looking with dismay up the 
road towards Bag  End they saw  a  tall chimney of brick in the distance. It 
was pouring out black smoke into the evening air. 
     Sam was beside himself. 'I'm going right on, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I'm 
going to see what's up. I want to find my gaffer.' 

####-     'We  ought  to find  out first what we're in for, Sam,'  said Merry. 'I  
guess  that  the "Chief" will have a gang of ruffians handy.  We  had better  
find someone who will tell us how things are round here.' 
     But in the village of Bywater all  the houses and holes  were shut, and 
no  one greeted them. They wondered  at  this, but they soon  discovered the 
reason  of  it. When they  reached  The Green Dragon, the last house  on the 
Hobbiton side, now lifeless and with broken  windows, they were disturbed to 
see half a dozen  large ill-favoured Men lounging against the inn-wall; they 
were squint-eyed and sallow-faced. 
     'Like that friend of Bill Ferny's at Bree,' said Sam. 
     'Like many that I saw at Isengard,' muttered Merry. 
     The ruffians had clubs in their  hands  and  horns by their  belts, but 
they had no other weapons, as far as could be seen.  As the  travellers rode 
up they left the wall and walked into the road, blocking the way. 
     'Where d'you  think   you're  going?'  said  one,  the largest and  most  
evil-looking of the crew.  'There's no road for you any  further.  And where 
are those precious Shirriffs?' 
     'Coming along nicely,'  said  Merry.  'A  little  footsore, perhaps. We 
promised to wait for them here.' 
     'Garn, what did I  say?' said the ruffian to his mates. 'I told Sharkey 
it was no  good trusting those little fools. Some of our chaps ought to have 
been sent.' 
     'And  what difference would that have made,  pray?' said Merry. 'We are 
not used to footpads in this country, but we know how to deal with them.' 
     'Footpads, eh?'  said the man: 'So that's your tone, is  it? Change it, 
or we'll change  it for you.  You little folk are getting too  uppish. Don't  
you trust too much in the Boss's kind heart. Sharkey's come now and he'll do 
what Sharkey says.' 
     'And what may that be?' said Frodo quietly. 
     'This country wants waking up and setting to rights,' said the ruffian, 
'and Sharkey's going to do it; and make it hard, if you drive him to it. You  
need a  bigger Boss. And you'll get one  before the year is  out, if there's 
any more trouble. Then you'll learn a thing or two, you little rat-folk.' 
     'Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans,' said Frodo. 'I am on  my way 
to call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of them too.' 
     The ruffian laughed. 'Lotho! He knows all right. Don't you worry. He'll 
do what  Sharkey says. Because if a  Boss  gives trouble, we can change him. 

####-See? And if little folks try to push in where they're not wanted, we can put 
them out of mischief. See?' 
     'Yes, I see,' said Frodo.  'For one thing, I see that you're behind the 
times  and the news here. Much has happened  since you  left the South. Your 
day is over, and all other ruffians'. The Dark Tower has  fallen, and  there 
is  a  King in  Gondor. And  Isengard has been destroyed,  and your precious 
master is  a beggar in  the wilderness. I passed him on the road. The King's 
messengers will ride up the Greenway now not bullies from Isengard. ' 
     The  man stared at him  and smiled.  'A  beggar in  the wilderness!' he 
mocked.  'Oh, is he  indeed? Swagger it, swagger it, my little cock -a -whoop.  
But that won't  stop us  living  in this fat  little country  where you have 
lazed long enough. And' - he snapped his fingers in Frodo's face   -  'King's 
messengers! That for them! When I see one, I'll take notice, perhaps.' 
     This was too much for  Pippin. His thoughts  went back to  the Field of 
Cormallen, and here was a squint-eyed rascal calling the Ring-bearer  'little 
cock -a -whoop'. He cast back his cloak, flashed out his sword, and the silver  
and sable of Gondor gleamed on him as he rode forward. 
     'I  am a  messenger of  the  King,' he  said. 'You are speaking  to the 
King's friend,  and one  of the most renowned in all the lands  of the West. 
You are a ruffian and a fool. Down on your knees in the road and ask pardon, 
or I will set this troll's bane in you!' 
     The sword glinted in the westering sun. Merry and Sam drew their swords 
also a nd rode  up to support  Pippin;  but Frodo did  not move. The ruffians 
gave back. Scaring  Breeland peasants, and  bullying bewildered hobbits, had 
been their work. Fearless  hobbits with  bright swords and grim faces were a  
great surprise.  And there  was a note in the voices of these newcomers that 
they had not heard before. It chilled them with fear. 
     'Go!'  said Merry. 'If you trouble this  village again, you will regret 
it.'  The three  hobbits  came  on, and then  the ruffians  turned and  fled 
running away up the Hobbiton Road; but they blew their horns as they ran. 
     'Well, we've come back none too soon,' said Merry. 
     'Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho,' said 
Frodo. 'Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him.' 
     'Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean?' said Pippin. 'Destroy  him I should 
say.' 
     'I don't think you quite understand things, Pippin,' said Frodo. 'Lotho 
never meant things to come to this pass. He has been a wicked fool, but he's 

####-caught now. The  ruffians are on top, gathering, robbing  and bullying,  and 
running or ruining things  as they  like, in his name.  And not  in his name 
even for much longer. He's a  prisoner in Bag  End  now,  I expect, and very 
frightened. We ought to try and rescue him.' 
     'Well I  am staggered!' said  Pippin.  'Of all the ends to  our journey 
that is the very last I should  have thought  of: to have to fight half-orcs 
and ruffians in the Shire itself - to rescue Lotho Pimple!' 
     'Fight?'  said  Frodo.  'Well,  I  suppose it  may  come  to  that. But 
remember: there is to be  no  slaying of hobbits, not even if they have gone 
over to the other side. Really gone over, I mean; not just obeying ruffians' 
orders  because they  are  frightened.  No hobbit has ever killed another on  
purpose in the Shire, and it is not to begin now. And nobody is to be killed 
at all,  if it  can be helped. Keep your tempers and hold your hands  to the 
last possible moment!' 
     'But  if  there  are many of  these  ruffians,'  said  Merry,  'it will 
certainly mean fighting. You won't rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by being 
shocked and sad, my dear Frodo.' 
     'No,'  said Pippin. 'It  won't be  so easy scaring them  a second time. 
They were taken by  surprise. You heard  that horn-blowing? Ev idently  there 
are other ruffians near at hand. They'll be much bolder when there's more of 
them together. We ought  to think of taking cover somewhere for  the  night. 
After all we're only four, even if we are armed.' 
     'I've an idea,' said  Sam.  'Let's go  to old  Tom Cotton's down  South 
Lane! He  always was a  stout fellow. And he has a lot of lads that were all 
friends of mine.' 
     'No!'  said Merry.  'It's  no good "getting under cover".  That is just  
what people have been  doing, and just what these  ruffians like.  They will 
simply come  down on us in force, corner us, and  then drive us out, or burn 
us in. No, we have got to do something at once.' 
     'Do what?' said Pippin. 
     'Raise the Shire!' said Merry. 'Now! Wake all our people! They hate all 
this, you can  see: all of them except perhaps one or two rascals, and a few 
fools that want to be important, but  don't at all understand what is really 
going  on. But Shire-folk have  been  so comfortable so long they don't know 
what to  do. They just want  a match, though, and they'll go up in fire. The 
Chief's Men must know that. They'll try to stamp on us and put us out quick. 
We've only got a very short time. 

####-     'Sam, you can make  a  dash for  Cotton's  farm, if  you like. He's the 
chief person round here,  and the sturdiest. Come on! I am going to blow the 
horn of Rohan, and give them all some music they have never heard before.' 
     They rode back to the middle of the village. There Sam turned aside and 
galloped off down the  lane that led south to Cotton's.  He had not gone far 
when he heard a sudden clear horn-call go up ringing  into the sky. Far over  
hill and field it echoed; and  so compelling  was that call that Sam himself 
almost turned and dashed back. His pony reared and neighed. 
     'On, lad! On!' he cried. 'We'll be going back soon.' 
     Then  he heard  Merry  change the  note, and  up went the  Horn-cry  of 
Buckland, shaking the air. 
     Awake! Awake! Fear, Fire, Foes! Awake! 
     Fire, Foes! Awake! 
     Behind him Sam heard a hubbub of voices and a great din and slamming of 
doors. In front of him lights sprang out in  the gloaming; dogs barked; feet 
came running. Before he got  to the lane's end there was Farmer Cotton  with 
three  of his lads, Young Tom,  Jolly, and Nick,  hurrying towards him. They 
had axes in their hands, and barred the way. 
     'Nay! It's not one of them ruffians,' Sam heard the farmer say. 'It's a  
hobbit by the size of it, but all dressed up queer. Hey!' he cried. 'Who are 
you, and what's all this to-do? ' 
     'It's Sam, Sam Gamgee. I've come back.' 
     Farmer Cotton came up close  and stared at him in the twilight. 'Well!' 
he exclaimed. 'The voice is right, and your face is  no worse  than  it was,  
Sam. But  I should a' passed you in the street in that gear. You've been  in 
foreign parts, seemingly. We feared you were dead.' 
     'That I ain't!'  said Sam.  'Nor Mr. Frodo. He's here and  his friends. 
And  that's  the to-do. They're raising the Shire. We're going to clear  out 
these ruffians, and their Chief too. We're starting now.' 
     'Good, good!' cried Farmer Cotton.  'So  it's  begun at last! I've been 
itching for trouble all this year, but folks wouldn't help. And I've had the 
wife  and Rosie to think of. These ruffians don't stick at nothing. But come 
on now, lads! Bywater is up! We must be in it!' 
     'What about Mrs.  Cotton and Rosie?' said Sam. 'It  isn't safe  yet for  
them to be left all alone.' 
     'My Nibs  is  with them. But you  can  go and help him,  if you  have a  
mind,' said Farmer Cotton with a grin. Then  he and his sons ran off towards 

####-the village. 
     Sam hurried  to  the house. By the  large round  door at the top of the 
steps  from the wide yard stood  Mrs. Cotton and Rosie, and Nibs in front of 
them grasping a hay-fork. 
     'It's  me!' shouted Sam  as he trotted up.  'Sam Gamgee! So  don't  try 
prodding me, Nibs. Anyway, I've a mail -shirt on me.' 
     He  jumped down from his pony and went up the steps. They stared at him 
in silence.  'Good evening, Mrs. Cotton!' he said.  'Hullo Rosie!' 
     'Hullo, Sam!' said Rosie. 'Where've you been I They said you were dead;  
but I've been expecting you since the Spring. You haven't hurried have you?' 
     'Perhaps  not,'  said Sam abashed. 'But I'm hurrying now. We're setting 
about the ruffians, and I've got to get back to Mr. Frodo. But I thought I'd 
have a look and see how Mrs. Cotton was keeping, and you, Rosie.' 
     'We're keeping nicely, thank you,' said Mrs. Cotton.  'Or should be, if 
it weren't for these thieving ruffians.' 
     'Well, be  off with you!' said Rosie. 'If you've been looking after Mr. 
Frodo all this while, what d'you want  to leave  him for, as soon  as things 
look dangerous?' 
     This  was  too much  for Sam. It  needed a  week's answer, or none.  He 
turned away and mounted his pony. But as he started off, Rosie  ran down the 
steps. 
     'I think you look fine, Sam,'  she  said. 'Go on now! But  take care of 
yourself, and come straight back as soon as you have settled the ruffians!' 
     When  Sam  got back  he found the  whole village roused. Already, apart  
from many younger lads,  more  than a hundred sturdy hobbits were  assembled 
with axes, and heavy  hammers, and  long knives, and stout staves: and a few 
had hunting-bows. More were still coming in from outlying farms. 
     Some of the village-folk had lit  a large fire, just to enliven things,  
and also because it was one of the things forbidden by the Chief. It  burned 
bright as  night came on. Others at Merry's orders  were setting up barriers 
across the road at each end of the  village. When  the Shirriffs  came up to 
the lower  one  they were  dumbfounded; but  as soon as they saw how  things 
were, most of  them took off  their  feathers and joined in  the revolt. The 
others slunk away. 
     Sam found Frodo and his friends by the  fire talking to old Tom Cotton, 
while an admiring crowd of Bywater folk stood round and stared. 
     'Well, what's the next move?' said Farmer Cotton. 

####-     'I  can't  say,'  said Frodo, 'until  I  know more. How  many  of these 
ruffians are there?' 
     'That's  hard  to tell,' said  Cotton. 'They moves  about and comes and 
goes. There's  sometimes  fifty of them  in their sheds up Hobbiton way; but 
they go out  from there roving round,  thieving  or "gathering" as they call 
it. Still there's seldom  less  than a score  round the  Boss, as they names 
him. He's at Bag End, or was; but he don't go outside the rounds now. No one 
s seen him at all, in fact, for a week or two; but the Men  don't let no one 
go near.' 
     'Hobbiton's not their only place, is it?' said Pippin. 
     'No, more's the pity,' said Cotton. 'There's a  good few down south  in 
Longbottom and by Sarn Ford, I hear; and some more lurking in the Woody 
End; 
and they've sheds at Waymeet.  And then there's  the Lockholes, as they call  
'em:  the old  storage-tunnels  at  Michel Delving  that  they've made  into 
prisons  for  those as stand up to  them. Still I  reckon there's  not above 
three hundred of  them in the Shire all told, and  maybe less. We can master  
them, if we stick together.' 
     'Have they got any weapons?' asked Merry. 
     'Whips,  knives, and  clubs, enough for their dirty  work:  that's  all 
they've showed so far,' said Cotton. 'But I dare say they've got other gear, 
if it comes to fighting. Some have bows, anywa y. They've shot one or two  of 
our folk.' 
     'There  you are, Frodo!' said Merry. 'I knew we should have  to  fight. 
Well, they started the killing.' 
     'Not exactly,' said Cotton. 'Leastways not the  shooting. Tooks started 
that. You see our dad Mr. Peregrin, he's never had no truck with this Lotho, 
not  from the beginning: said that if anyone was going to play the chief  at 
this time of day,  it would  be the right Thain of the Shire and no upstart. 
And when Lotho sent his Men they got no  change out of him. Tooks are lucky, 
they've got those deep holes in the Green Hills,  the Great  Smials and all, 
and the  ruffians can't come at 'em; and they won't let the ruffians come on 
their land.  If they  do, Tooks hunt  'em. Tooks shot three for prowling and 
robbing.  After  that the  ruffians turned nastier. And they  keep  a pretty 
close watch on Tookland. No one gets in nor out of it now.' 
     'Good  for the  Tooks!' cried Pippin.  'But someone is going  to get in 
again, now. I am off to the Smials. Anyone coming with me to Tuckborough?' 

####-     Pippin rode off with half  a dozen lads on ponies.  'See you soon!'  he 
cried. 'It's only  fourteen miles or so over the fields. I'll bring you back  
an army of Tooks in the morning.' Merry blew  a horn-call after them as they 
rode off into the gathering night. The people cheered. 
     'All the same,' said Frodo to all those who stood near, 'I wish for  no 
killing; not even of the ruffians, unless  it must be done, to  prevent them 
from hurting hobbits.' 
     'All right! '  said Merry.  'But  we shall be having  a visit  from  the 
Hobbiton gang any time  now, I  think. They  won't come just to  talk things 
over.  We'll try to deal with them  neatly, but  we must be prepared for the 
worst. Now I've got a plan.' 
     'Very good,' said Frodo. 'You make the arrangements.' 
     Just  then  some hobbits, who had  been sent out towards Hobbiton, came 
running in. 'They're coming!' they said. 'A score or more. But two have gone  
off west across country.' 
     'To Waymeet, that'll be, ' said  Cotton,  'to fetch  more  of  the gang. 
Well, it's fifteen mile each way. We needn't trouble about them just yet.' 
     Merry  hurried off to  give orders. Farmer Cotton cleared  the  street, 
sending everyone indoors, except the  older  hobbits who  had weapons of some 
sort. They had not long to wait. Soon they could hear loud  voices, and then  
the  tramping  of heavy feet. Presently  a whole squad of the  ruffians came 
down  the  road. They saw the barrier and laughed. They did not imagine that 
ther e  was anything in  this little  land  that would stand up to  twenty of 
their kind together. 
     The hobbits  opened the barrier and stood aside.  'Thank you!' the  Men 
jeered. 'Now run home to bed before you're whipped.' Then they marched along 
the street  shouting: 'Put those lights out! Get indoors  and stay there! Or 
we'll take fifty  of you  to the Lockholes for  a year. Get in!  The Boss is 
losing his temper.' 
     No one paid any heed to their orders; but as the  ruffians passed, they 
closed in  qu ietly behind and followed them.  When the  Men reached the fire 
there was Farmer Cotton standing all alone warming his hands. 
     'Who  are   you,  and  what   d'you   think  you're  doing?'  said  the 
ruffian-leader. 
     Farmer Cotton looked at him slowly. 'I was just going to ask you that,' 
he said. 'This isn't your country, and you're not wanted.' 
     'Well, you're wanted  anyhow,' said the leader. 'We want you.  Take him 

####-lads! Lockholes for him, and give him something to keep him quiet!' 
     The Men took one step forward  and stopped short. There rose a  roar of 
voices all round them,  and suddenly  they were aware that Farmer Cotton was 
not  all  alone. They  were surrounded.  In  the dark  on  the  edge  of the 
firelight stood a ring  of hobbits  that had crept  up out  of  the shadows. 
There was nearly two hundred of them, all holding some weapon. 
     Merry stepped  forward. 'We have met before,' he  said  to  the leader, 
'and I warned you not to come  back here. I warn you again: you are standing 
in  the  light and you are covered  by archers. If you lay a finger on  this 
farmer, or on anyone  else, you will be  shot at once.  Lay down any weapons 
that you have!' 
     The leader looked round. He was trapped. But he was not scared, not now 
with a score of his fellows to  back  him.  He knew too little of hobbits to 
understand his peril.  Foolishly he  decided to  fight. It  would be easy to 
break out. 
     'At 'em lads!' he cried. 'Let 'em have it!' 
     With a  long knife in his left hand and a  club in  the other he made a  
rush  at the  ring, trying  to burst out back towards Hobbiton.  He aimed  a  
savage blow at Merry who stood in his way.  He fell dead with four arrows in 
him: 
     That was enough for the others.  They gave in. Their weapons were taken  
from them, and they were roped  together,  and marched  off to  an empty hut 
that they had built themselves, and there they were tied hand  and foot, and 
locked up under guard. The dead leader was dragged off and buried. 
     'Seems almost too easy  after all, don't it?' said Cotton.  'I said  we 
could master them. But we needed a call. You came  back in the nick o' time, 
Mr. Merry.' 
     'There's more to be done still,' said Merry. 'If  you're  right in your 
reckoning, we haven't dealt with a tithe of them yet. But it's  dark now.  I 
think the  next stroke must  wait  until morning. Then  we must  call on the 
Chief.' 
     'Why not  now?' said Sam.  'It's not much more than  six o'clock. And I 
want to see my gaffer. D'you know what's come of him, Mr. Cotton?' 
     'He's not too  well,  and not too bad, Sam,' said the farmer. 'They dug 
up Bagshot Row, and that  was a sad blow  to  him. He's in one of  them  new 
houses that  the Chief's Men  used to  build while  they still did any  work 
other than burning and thieving:  not  above a mile from the end of Bywater. 

####-But he comes around to me, when he gets a chance,  and I see he's better fed 
than some of the poor bodies. All against The Rules, of course. I'd have had 
him with me, but that wasn't allowed.' 
     'Thank'ee indeed, Mr. Cotton, and I'll never forget it,' said Sam. 'But 
I want to see him. That Boss and that Sharkey, as they  spoke of, they might  
do a mischief up there before the morning.' 
     'All right, Sam,' said Cotton.  'Choose a  lad or two, and go and fetch 
him to my  house. You'll not have need to  go near the old  Hobbiton village 
over Water. My Jolly here will show you.' 
     Sam went off. Merry arranged for look -outs round the village and guards 
at  the barriers during  the  night. Then he and Frodo went off with  Farmer  
Cotton. They sat with  the family in the warm kitchen, and the Cottons asked 
a  few polite  questions about  their travels,  but hardly  listened  to the 
answers: they were far more concerned with events in the Shire. 
     'It all began with Pimple, as we call him,' said Farmer Cotton; 'and it 
began as soon as you'd  gone off, Mr. Frodo.  He'd funny  ideas had  Pimple. 
Seems he wanted to own everything himself, and  then order other folk about. 
It soon came out that he already did own a sight more than was good for him; 
and  he was  always grabbing  more, though  where he got  the  money  was  a  
mystery:  mills and malt-houses and  inns,  and farms, and leaf-plantations.  
He'd already bought Sandyman's mill before he came to Bag End, seemingly. 
     'Of course he started with a lot of property in the Southfarthing which 
he had from his dad; and it seems he'd been selling a  lot o' the best leaf,  
and sending it away quietly for a year or two.  But at the end o'  last year 
he began sending away  loads of  stuff,  not only leaf. Things  began to get 
short, and winter coming on, too. Folk got angry, but  he had his answer.  A 
lot of Men, ruffians mostly,  came with great waggons, some to carry off the 
goods south-away,  and  others  to stay. And  more came.  And before we knew 
where we were they were planted here  and there all over the Shire, and were 
felling trees  and digging and building themselves sheds and houses just  as 
they liked. At first goods and damage was paid  for by Pimple; but soon they 
began lording it around and taking what they wanted. 
     'Then there was a bit  of trouble,  but not  enough. Old Will the Mayor  
set off for  Bag End to protest, but he never got there. Ruffians laid hands 
on him  and took and locked him up in a hole in Michel Delving, and there he 
is  now.  And after that, it  would bc soon after New Year,  there wasn't no 
more Mayor, and Pimple called himself Chief Shirriff, or just Chief, and did 

####-as  he liked; and  if anyone  got "uppish" as  they called it, they followed 
Will. So things went from bad to worse. There wasn't no smoke left, save for 
the Men;  and the  Chief didn't hold with beer, save for his Men, and closed 
all the inns;  and everything except Rules got  shorter and  shorter, unless 
one could hide a bit  of one's own  when the ruffians  went  round gathering 
stuff  up "for fair  distribution": which meant  they got it  and we didn't, 
except for the leavings which you could have at the Shirriff-houses,  if you  
could  stomach them.  All  very bad.  But since Sharkey came it's been plain  
ruination.' 
     'Who is this Sharkey?'  said Merry. 'I heard  one of the ruffians speak 
of him.' 
     'The biggest  ruffian o' the lot, seemingly,' answered  Cotton. 'It was 
about last harvest,  end o'  September maybe,  that  we first heard of  him. 
We've never seen him, but he's up at Bag End; and he's the real Chief now, I  
guess.  All the ruffians  do what he says; and what he says is mostly  hack, 
burn, and ruin; and now it s come to killing. There s  no longer even any bad 
sense in it. They cut down trees and let 'em lie, they burn houses and build 
no more. 
     'Take Sandyman's mill now. Pimple  knocked it down almost as soon as he 
came to Bag End. Then he  brought in a lot o' dirty-looking Men  to  build a  
bigger one and fill it full o' wheels and outlandish contraptions. Only that 
fool Ted was pleased by  that, and he works  there  cleaning  wheels for the 
Men, where his dad was the  Miller and his own master.  Pimple's idea was to 
grind  more  and faster, or  so he said. He's got other mills  like  it. But 
you've got to have grist before you can grind; and there was no more for the 
new mill to do than for the  old. But since Sharkey came they don't grind no 
more corn at all. They're always a -hammering and a -letting out a smoke and a  
stench, and there isn't no peace even at night  in  Hobbiton.  And they pour 
out filth a  purpose; they've  fouled all  the lower Water  and it's getting 
down into Brandywine. If they want to make the Shire into a desert,  they're 
going the right way about it. I don't believe that fool of a Pimple's behind 
all this. It's Sharkey, I say.' 
     'That's right!' put in Young Tom. 'Why, they even took Pimple's old ma, 
that  Lobelia, and he was  fond  of her,  if no one  else was.  Some  of the 
Hobbiton folk, they  saw it. She  comes down the lane with her old umbrella. 
Some of the ruffians were going up with a big cart. 
     ' "Where be you a -going?" says she. 

####-     ' "To Bag End," says they. 
     ' "What for?" says she. 
     ' "To put up some sheds for Sharkey," says they. 
     ' "Who said you could?" says she. 
     ' "Sharkey," says they. "So get out o' the road, old hagling!" 
     '  "I'll give you Sharkey, you dirty thieving ruffians!" says  she, and 
ups with  her umbrella and goes for the leader. near twice her size. So they 
took  her. Dragged her off  to the Lockholes, at her age  too.  They've took  
others we miss more, but  there's no  denying she  showed  more  spirit than 
most.' 
     Into the middle of this talk came Sam, bursting in with his gaffer. Old 
Gamgee did not look much older, but he was a little deafer. 
     'Good evening. Mr. Baggins!' he said. 'Glad indeed I am to see you safe 
back. But  I've  a bone to pick with you, in a manner  o' speaking, if I may 
make so bold. You didn't never ought  to  have a' sold Bag End, as  I always 
said. That's what started all the mischief. And while you're been trapessing 
in foreign parts, chasing  Black Men  up  mountains from  what my  Sam says,  
though what for he don't make clear, they've been and dug up Bagshot Row and 
ruined my taters!' 
     'I  am very  sorry, Mr.  Gamgee,' said Frodo. 'But now I've  come back, 
I'll do my best to make amends.' 
     'Well,  you  can't say  fairer than that,' said  the gaffer. 'Mr. Frodo 
Baggins  is a real gentlehobbit, I always have said, whatever  you may think  
of some others of the name, begging your pardon. And I hope my Sam's 
behaved 
hisself and given satisfaction?' 
     'Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee,'  said Frodo. 'Indeed,  if you  will 
believe it, he's  now one of the most famous  people  in all  the lands, and 
they are making songs about his deeds from  here to  the Sea and beyond  the 
Great River.' Sam blushed,  but he looked gratefully at Frodo,  for  Rosie's 
eyes were shining and she was smiling at him. 
     'It takes a lot o' believing,' said  the gaffer, 'though I can see he's 
been mixing in strange company. What's come of his weskit? I don't hold with 
wearing ironmongery, whether it wears well or no.' 
     Farmer  Cotton's household  and  all  his  guests  were  up  early next 
morning. Nothing  had  been  heard  in  the  night, but more  trouble  would 
certainly  come before the  day was old.  'Seems as if none o' the  ruffians 

####-were left  up at Bag End,' said Cotton; 'but  the gang from Waymeet will  be 
along any time now.' 
     After breakfast  a messenger from the Tookland rode in. He was in  high  
spirits. 'The Thain has raised  all our country,' he said, 'and the news  is 
going like fire all ways. The ruffians that were watching our land have fled 
off south, those that escaped alive. The  Thain has gone after them, to hold 
off the big gang down  that way; but he's sent Mr Peregrin back with all the 
other folk he can spare.' 
     The next news  was less good. Merry, who had been out  all  night, came 
riding in about ten  o'clock. 'There's a big band about four miles away,' he 
said.  'They're  coming along the  road from Waymeet, but a good many  stray 
ruffians have joined up with them. There must be close on a hundred of them; 
and they're fire-raising as they come. Curse them!' 
     'Ah! This  lot  won't stay to  talk, they'll kill, if they  can,'  said 
Farmer  Cotton.  'If Tooks don't come sooner, we'd best get behind cover and 
shoot without  arguing.  There's  got to  be  some  fighting  before this is 
settled, Mr. Frodo.' 
     The  Tooks  did come sooner.  Before long  they  marched in, a  hundred  
strong,  from  Tuckborough and  the Green Hills with  Pippin at their  head. 
Merry now  had  enough  sturdy  hobbitry to deal with  the  ruffians. Scouts 
reported  that  they  were  keeping  close  together.  They  knew  that  the 
countryside had risen against  them,  and  plainly  meant  to  deal with the 
rebellion ruthlessly, at its centre in Bywater. But however grim they, might 
be, they  seemed to have  no leader among  them who understood warfare. 
They 
came on without any precautions. Merry laid his plans quickly. 
     The ruffians  came tramping along  the  East Road, and  without halting 
turned up the Bywater Road,  which ran for  some way sloping up between 
high 
banks with low hedges on top. Round a bend,  about a  furlong from  the main 
road, they met a stout barrier of old farm-carts upturned. That halted them. 
At the same  moment they  became aware that  the hedges on  both sides,  just 
above their  heads, were all lined with hobbits. Behind them  other  hobbits 
now pushed out  some more waggons  that had  been  hidden in a field, and so 
blocked the way back. A voice spoke to them from above. 
     'Well, you  have walked into a trap, '  said Merry. 'Your  fellows  from 
Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the  rest are prisoners. Lay down 

####-your weapons! Then  go  back twenty paces and sit down. Any who try to 
break 
out will be shot.' 
     But  the ruffians could  not now  be  cowed  so easily.  A few of  them 
obeyed, but were immediately set on  by their fellows. A score or more broke 
back  and  charged the waggons. Six were shot, but the  remainder burst out, 
killing two hobbits, and then  scattering across country in the direction of 
the  Woody End. Two more fell as they ran.  Merry blew a loud horn-call, and 
there were answering calls from a distance. 
     'They won't get far,' said  Pippin. 'All that country is alive with our 
hunters now.' 
     Behind,  the trapped Men in the lane,  still about four score, tried to 
climb the barrier and the banks, and the hobbits were obliged  to shoot many  
of them or hew them with axes. But many of the strongest and  most desperate 
got out on the west side, and  attacked  their enemies  fiercely ,  being now 
more  bent on killing than escaping. Several hobbits fell, and the rest were 
wavering, when Merry and Pippin,  who were on the east side, came across and 
charged  the ruffians. Merry himself slew  the  leader, a  great squint -eyed 
brute like  a huge orc.  Then he drew  his forces off,  encircling the  last 
remnant of the Men in a wide ring of archers. 
     At last all  was over.  Nearly  seventy of the ruffians lay dead on the 
field, and a dozen  were prisoners. Nineteen hobbits  were killed, a nd  some 
thirty were wounded. The dead  ruffians were laden on waggons and hauled off 
to an  old sand-pit nearby and there buried:  in the Battle  Pit, as it  was 
afterwards called. The fallen hobbits were  laid together in a grave on  the 
hill-side,  wher e later a great  stone was set up with a garden about it. So 
ended the  Battle of Bywater, 1419, the last battle fought in the Shire, and 
the  only battle since the  Greenfields, 1147, away up in the Northfarthing. 
In consequence, though it happily cost very few lives, it has a  chapter  to 
itself in the Red Book, and  the names of all those  who took part were made 
into a Roll, and learned by heart by Shire-historians. The very considerable 
rise in the fame and fortune of the Cottons dates from this time; but at the 
top of the Roll  in all  accounts  stand the names of  Captains Meriadoc and 
Peregrin. 
     Frodo had been in the battle, but he had not drawn sword, and his chief 
part had  been to prevent the hobbits  in their wrath at  their losses, from 
slaying those  of  their enemies who  threw  down  their  weapons. When  the 

####-fighting  was over,  and  the later labours were ordered, Merry, Pippin, and 
Sam joined him, and  they rode back with the Cottons. They ate a late midday 
meal, and then Frodo said with a  sigh: 'Well, I suppose it is time now that 
we dealt with the "Chief".' 
     'Yes indeed; the  sooner the better,'  said  Merry.  'And don't be  too 
gentle! He's  responsible  for bringing  in these ruffians, and  for all the 
evil they have done.' 
     Farmer Cotton  collected an escort  of some two  dozen  sturdy hobbits. 
'For it's only a guess that  there is no ruffians left at Bag End,' he said. 
'We don't know.' Then  they set out  on foot. Frodo, Sam,  Merry, and Pippin 
led the way. 
     It was one of the saddest hours  in their lives. The great chimney rose 
up  before them;  and as  they drew  near the old  village across the Water, 
through rows of new  mean houses along each side of the  road, they saw  the 
new mill in all its  frowning and  dirty ugliness:  a  great  brick building 
straddling  the  stream, which  it  fouled  with  a  steaming  and  stinking 
overflow. All along the Bywater Road every tree had been felled. 
     As  they crossed the bridge  and looked up the Hill  they  gasped. Even 
Sam's vision in the Mirror  had not prepared  him for what they saw. The Old 
Grange  on the  west side had been knocked down, and its place taken by rows 
of tarred sheds. All the chestnuts were gone. The  banks and  hedgerows were 
broken. Great  waggons wer e standing in  disorder in  a field beaten bare of 
grass. Bagshot  Row was a yawning sand and gravel quarry. Bag End up. 
beyond 
could not be seen for a clutter of large huts. 
     'They've cut it down!' cried Sam. 'They've cut down the Party Tree!' He 
pointed to where the tree. had stood under which Bilbo had made his Farewell 
Speech. It was lying lopped and  dead in the field. As if this was the  last 
straw Sam burst into tears. 
     A laugh put an end to them. There was a surly hobbit lounging over  the 
low wall of the  mill-yard. He was grimy -faced and  black -handed.  'Don't  'ee 
like it, Sam?'  he sneered. 'But  you always  was soft. I thought you'd gone  
off in  one o' them ships  you used to prattle about, sailing, sailing. What 
d'you want to come back for? We've work to do in the Shire now.' 
     'So I see,' said Sam. 'No time for washing, but time for wall-propping. 
But  see here,  Master  Sandyman,  I've a score to pay in this village,  and 
don't you make it any longer with your  jeering, or you'll  foot a bill  too 

####-big for your purse.' 
     Ted Sandyman spat over the wall: 'Garn!' he said. 'You can't touch  me.  
I'm  a friend o'  the  Boss's. But he'll touch you all right, if I have  any 
more of your mouth.' 
     'Don't  waste any more words  on  the  fool, Sam!' said Frodo. 'I  hope 
there are not many more hobbits that have become like  this.  It  would be a  
worse trouble than all the damage the Men have done.' 
     'You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman,' said Merry. 'And also very much 
out of your reckoning. We are just going up the Hill to remove your precious 
Boss. We have dealt with his Men.' 
     Ted gaped, for at  that moment he first caught sight of the escort that 
at a sign from Merry now marched over the bridge. Dashing back into the mill 
he ran out with a horn and blew it loudly. 
     'Save your breath!' laughed Merry. 'I've a better.' Then lifting up his 
silver horn he winded it, and its clear call rang  over the Hill; and out of 
the  holes and sheds and shabby houses of Hobbiton the hobbits answered, and 
came pouring out, and  with cheers and loud cries they followed  the company 
up the road to Bag End. 
     At the top of the lane the party halted, and Frodo and his friends went 
on; and they came at  last to the once beloved place. The garden wa s full of 
huts and sheds, some so near the old westward windows that  they cut off all 
their  light. There were piles of refuse everywhere. The door  was  scarred; 
the bell-chain  was dangling  loose, and the bell would not  ring.  Knocking 
brought no answer. At length they pushed and the door yielded. They went in. 
The  place stank  and was  full of filth and  disorder: it did not appear to 
have been used for some time. 
     'Where  is that miserable Lotho hiding?' said Merry. They  had searched 
every room  and found no living thing save rats and  mice. 'Shall we turn on 
the others to search the sheds?' 
     'This is  worse than Mordor!' said Sam. 'Much worse in  a way. It comes 
home to you, as  they say; because it is home, and you remember it before it  
was all ruined.' 
     'Yes,  this is Mordor,' said Frodo. 'Just one of its works. Saruman was 
doing  its  work all  the time,  even  when he  thought  he was working  for  
himself. And the same with those that Saruman tricked, like Lotho.' 
     Merry looked round in dismay and disgust. 'Let's get out!' he said. 'If 
I had known all the  mischief he had caused, I should  have stuffed my pouch 

####-down Saruman's throat.' 
     'No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I  am  able to welcome you  
home.' There standing at the  door was Saruman himself, looking well -fed and 
well-pleased; his eyes gleamed with malice and amusement. 
     A sudden light broke on Frodo. 'Sharkey!' he cried. 
     Saruman laughed.  'So you have heard the name, have you? All  my people 
used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of affection, possibly.( 
But evidently you did not expect to see me here.' 
     'I did not,' said Frodo. 'But I might  have guessed.  A little mischief 
in a mean way: Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of it. 
     'Quite  capable,'  said Saruman, 'and more  than a little. You  made me 
laugh, you hobbit-lordlings, riding  along with  all  those  great people so 
secure and so pleased with your little selves. You thought you had done very 
well out of it a ll, and could now just amble back and have a nice quiet time 
in the country. Saruman's home could  be all wrecked, and he could be turned 
out, but no one could touch  yours. Oh  no!  Gandalf would look  after  your  
affairs.' 
     Saruman laughed  again. 'Not he! When his tools have done their task he 
drops them. But you must  go dangling  after him,  dawdling and talking, and 
riding round twice as far as you needed. "Well," thought I, "if they're such  
fools, I  will  get ahead of them and  teach  them  a  lesson.  One ill turn 
deserves another." It  would  have been  a  sharper lesson, if  only you had 
given  me a  little  more time and more Men. Still  I have already done much  
that you will  find  it hard to mend or undo in your lives. And  it  will be 
plea sant to think of that and set it against my injuries.' 
     'Well, if that is what you find  pleasure in,' said Frodo, 'I pity you. 
It will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never return!' 
     The hobbits of the villages  had  seen Saruman  come out of one  of the 
huts, and at once they came crowding up  to  the door of  Bag End. When they 
heard Frodo's command, they murmured angrily: 
     'Don't let him go! Kill him! He's a villain and a murderer. Kill him!' 
     Saruman looked round at their hostile faces and smiled. 'Kill  him!' he 
mocked. 'Kill him, if you think there  are enough of you, my brave hobbits!' 
He drew himself  up and stared at them darkly  with his black eyes.  'But do 
not think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my power! Whoever strikes 
me shall  be accursed. And if my blood stains the Shire, it shall wither and 
never again be healed.' 

####-     The hobbits recoiled. But Frodo said: 'Do  not believe him! He has lost  
all power, save his voice that  can still daunt you and deceive you, if  you  
let it.  But  I will not  have him slain. It is useless to meet revenge with 
revenge: it will heal nothing. Go, Saruman, by the speediest way!' 
     'Worm! Worm!' Saruman called; and out of a  nearby hut came 
Wormtongue, 
crawling, almost like a dog. To the road again, Worm!' said Saruman.  'These 
fine fellows and lordlings are turning us adrift again. Come along!' 
     Saruman turned  to go, and Wormtongue shuffled after  him.  But even as 
Saruman passed close to Frodo a knife flashed in his  hand,  and  he stabbed 
swiftly.  The blade turned  on  the hidden  mail-coat  and snapped.  A dozen  
hobbits, led by Sam, leaped forward with a cry and flung  the villain to the 
ground. Sam drew his sword. 
     'No, Sam!' said  Frodo. 'Do not kill him even now.  For he has not hurt 
me.  And in any case I do not wish him to be slain in this evil mood. He was 
great once, of  a  noble kind that we  should  not  dare to raise  our hands 
against. He is fallen, and his cure is beyond us;  but  I would still  spare 
him, in the hope that he may find it.' 
     Saruman rose to his feet, and stared at Frodo. There was a strange look  
in his  eyes of mingled wonder and  respect and  hatred.  'You  have  grown, 
Halfling,' he said. 'Yes, you have grown very much. You are wise, and cruel. 
You  have  robbed  my revenge of  sweetness,  and  now  I must go  hence  in 
bitterness, in debt to your mercy.  I hate it and you! Well, I go and I will 
trouble you no more. But do  not expect me to wish you health and long life. 
You will have neither. But that is not my doing. I merely foretell.' 
     He walked away, and  the hobbits made a lane for him to pass; but their 
knuckles whitened as  they gripped  on their  weapons. Wormtongue hesitated, 
and then followed his master. 
     'Wormtongue!' called Frodo. 'You need not follow him. I know of no evil  
you have done to me. You can  have rest and food here for a while, until you  
are stronger and can go your own ways.' 
     Wormtongue  halted  and  looked  back at  him, half  prepared  to  stay. 
Saruman turned.  'No evil?'  he  cackled. 'Oh no! Even when he sneaks out at 
night it is only to look at the stars. But did I hear someone ask where poor  
Lotho is hiding? You know, don't you, Worm? Will you tell them?' 
     Wormtongue cowered down and whimpered: 'No, no!' 
     'Then I  will,'  said Saruman.  'Worm killed  your  Chief,  poor little 

####-fellow, your nice little Boss. Didn't you, Worm? Stabbed him in his sleep, I 
believe.  Buried him, I hope;  though Worm has been very hungry lately.  No, 
Worm is not really nice. You had better leave him to me.' 
     A look of wild hatred came into Wormtongue's red eyes. 'You told me to;  
you made me do it,' he hissed. 
     Saruman laughed. 'You do what Sharkey says,  always, don't  you,  Worm?  
Well,  now  he  says:  follow!'  He  kicked  Wormtongue in  the face  as  he 
grovelled, and  turned and made off. But at that something snapped: suddenly 
Wormtongue rose up, drawing a hidden knife, and then with a snarl like a dog 
he sprang on Saruman's back, jerked his head back, cut his throat, and  with 
a yell  ran off  down the lane. Before Frodo could recover or  speak a word, 
three hobbit-bows twanged and Wormtongue fell dead. 
     To the dismay of those that stood by, about the  body of Saruman a grey 
mist gathered, and  rising slowly to a great height like smoke  from a fire, 
as a pale shrouded  figure it loomed over the Hill. For a moment it wavered,  
looking to the West; but out of the West came a cold wind, and it bent away,  
and with a sigh dissolved into nothing. 
     Frodo looked down at the body with pity and horror, for as he looked it 
seemed that long years of death were suddenly revealed in it, and it shrank, 
and the shrivelled face became rags of skin upon a hideous skull. Lifting up 
the skirt  of the dirty cloak  that sprawled beside  it, he covered it over, 
and turned away. 
     'And  that's  the end of that,'  said Sam. 'A nasty end,  and I  wish I 
needn't have seen it; but it's a good riddance.' 
     'And the very last end of the War, I hope,' said Merry. 
     'I hope so,' said Frodo and sighed. 'The very last stroke. But to think  
that it  should fall here, at the very  door  of Bag End! Among all my hopes 
and fears at least I never expected that.' 
     'I shan't call it  the end, till we've cleared  up  the mess,' said Sam 
gloomily. 'And that'll take a lot of time and work.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. The Grey Havens 

 
 
     The clearing up certainly needed a lot of work, but  it took  less time 
than Sam had feared. The day  after the battle Frodo  rode to Michel Delving 
and released the prisoners from  the Lockholes. One  of the first  that they 
found was  poor Fredegar Bolger, Fatty no longer. He had been taken when the 
ruffians smoked  out a band of rebels that  he  led from their hidings up in 
the Brockenbores by the hills of Scary. 
     'You  would have  done better  to  come with us  after  all,  poor  old 
Fredegar!' said Pippin, as they carried him out too weak to walk. 
     He opened an eye and tried gallantly to  smile. 'Who's this young giant  
with the loud voice?' he  whispered. 'Not little Pippin! What's your size in 
hats now?' 
     Then  there  was Lobelia. Poor thing, she looked very old and thin when 
they rescued her  from a dark and narrow  cell. She insisted on hobbling out 
on her own feet; and she had such a welcome, and there was such clapping and 
cheering when she appeared,  leaning on Frodo's arm but still clutching  her  
umbrella, that she was quite touched, and drove away in tears. She had never 
in her life been popular before. But she was crushed  by the news of  Lotho's 
murder, and she would' not return to Bag End. She gave it back to Frodo, and 
went to her own people, the Bracegirdles of Hardbottle. 
     When the poor  creature died next Spring-she  was after all more than a  
hundred years  old  - Frodo was  surprised and much  moved: she had left all  
that remained of her money and of Lotho's for him to use in helping  hobbits 
made homeless by the troubles. So that feud was ended. 
     Old Will Whitfoot had been in the Lockholes longer than any, and though 
he had  perhaps  been treated  less harshly  than  some,  he needed a lot of 
feeding up before he could look the part of Mayor; so Frodo agreed to act as 
his Deputy, until Mr. Whitfoot was  in shape again. The  only  thing that he 
did as  Deputy Mayor was  to reduce the Shirriffs to  their proper functions 
and numbers. The task of  hunting  out the last remnant of  the ruffians was 
left to Merry and  Pippin,  and  it was soon done. The southern gangs, after  
hearing the news of the Battle of  Bywater, fled out of the land and offered 
little resistance to the Thain. Before the Year's End the few survivors were 
rounded  up in  the  woods,  and those  that  surrendered were shown  to the 

####-borders.  
     Meanwhile the  labour  of  repair went on apace, and   Sam was kept very 
busy. Hobbits can work like bees when the mood  and the need comes on  
them. 
Now  there were thousands of willing  hands of all ages, from the  small but 
nimble ones of the hobbit lads and lasses to the well-worn and horny ones of 
the gaffers  and gammers.  Before Yule not a brick was left standing of  the 
new Shirriff-houses  or of anything that had been built by 'Sharkey's  Men';  
but the bricks were used to repair many an old hole, to make it snugger  and  
drier. Great stores of goods a nd  food, and beer,  were found that had  been 
hidden away  by  the  ruffians in  sheds and barns and deserted  holes,  and 
especially in the tunnels  at Michel  Delving  and  in the  old quarries  at 
Scary; so that there was a great deal better cheer that Yule than anyone had 
hoped for. 
     One of the first  things done in Hobbiton,  before even  the removal of 
the new mill, was the clearing of the Hill and Bag End, and the  restoration 
of Bagshot Row. The front of the new sand-pit was all levelled and made into 
a large sheltered garden, and new holes were dug in the southward face, back 
into the Hill, and they  were lined with brick. The Gaffer  was  restored to 
Number Three; and he said often and did not care who heard it: 
     'It's an  ill wind as  blows nobody no good, as I always say. And All's 
well as ends Better!' 
     There was some discussion of the name that the new row should be given. 
Battle  Gardens  was thought  of,  or Better  Smials.  But  after a while in 
sensible hobbit-fashion it was just called New Row. It was a purely  Bywater  
joke to refer to it as Sharkey's End. 
     The trees were the worst loss and damage, for at Sharkey's bidding they 
had been  cut down recklessly far  and wide over the Shire; and Sam  grieved 
over this more than anything else. For  one thing, this hurt would take long 
to heal, and only  his great-grandchildren, he thought,  would see the Shire 
as it ought to be. 
     Then  suddenly  one day, for he had  been too busy for  weeks to give a  
thought to  his adventures,   he remembered the gift of Galadriel. He brought  
the box  out and showed it to  the  other Travellers (for  so they were  now 
called by everyone), and asked their advice. 
     'I wondered when you would think of it,' said Frodo. 'Open it!' 
     Inside it was filled with a grey  dust, soft and fine, in the middle of 

####-which was a seed, like a small nut with a  silver shale. 'What can I do with 
this?' said Sam. 
     'Throw it in the air on  a breezy day  and  let it do  its  work!' said 
Pippin. 
     'On what?' said Sam. 
     'Choose one spot  as  a  nursery, and  see what happens  to the  plants 
there,' said Merry. 
     'But I'm  sure  the Lady  would not like me to keep it all  for my  own 
garden, now so many folk have suffered,' said Sam. 
     'Use all the wi ts and knowledge you have of your own, Sam,' said Frodo,  
'and then  use the  gift to  help  your  work  and  better  it. And  use  it 
sparingly. There is not much here, and I expect every grain has a value.' 
     So Sam planted saplings in all the  places where specially beautiful or  
beloved trees had been destroyed, and he put a grain of the precious dust in 
the soil at the root of each. He went up and  down the Shire in this labour; 
but if he  paid special attention to Hobbiton and Bywater no one blamed h im. 
And  at  the end he found that he still had a little of the dust left; so he 
went to the Three-Farthing  Stone, which is as near the centre of the  Shire 
as no matter, and cast it  in  the air with his  blessing. The little silver  
nut he  planted  in the Party Field where the tree had  once  been;  and  he 
wondered  what would  come  of  it. All through  the winter  he remained  as 
patient  as  he  could,  and tried  to  restrain himself  from  going  round 
constantly to see if anything was happening. 
     Spring surpassed his wildest hopes. His trees began to sprout and grow, 
as if time was in a hurry and  wished to make one year do for twenty. In the 
Party Field a beautiful young sapling leaped up: it had silver bark and long 
leaves and burst into golden flowers  in April. It was indeed a mallorn, and 
it was the wonder of the neighbourhood.  In after years, as it grew in grace 
and beauty, it was known far and wide and people would come long journeys 
to 
see it: the only mallorn  west of the Mountains and east of the Sea, and one 
of the finest in the world. 
     Altogether 1420 in  the Shire was a marvellous year. Not only was there 
wonderful sunshine and delicious rain, in due times and perfect measure, but 
there seemed something more: an air of richness and growth, and a gleam of a  
beauty  beyond  that  of  mortal summers  that flicker  and  pass  upon this 
Middle-earth. All the children born or begotten in that year, and there were 

####-many, were fair to see and strong, and most of them  had a rich golden  hair 
that had before  been rare  among hobbits.  The fruit was so  plentiful that 
young  hobbits very nearly bathed in  strawberries and cream; and later they 
sat on the lawns under the plum-trees  and ate, until they had made piles of 
stones  like  small pyramids or  the  heaped skulls of a conqueror, and then 
they  moved on. And no  one was ill,  and everyone was pleased. except those 
who had to mow the grass.  
     In the  Southfarthing the vines were laden, and the yield of 'leaf' was 
astonishing; and everywhere there was  so much  corn that at  Harvest  every 
barn was stuffed. 'The  Northfarthing barley  was so fine  that the beer  of 
1420 malt was long remembered and became a byword. Indeed a generation 
later 
one might hear an  old gaffer  in an inn, aft er  a good pint  of well-earned 
ale,  put  down his mug with a sigh:  'Ah! that was  proper fourteen-twenty, 
that was!' 
     Sam stayed at first at  the Cottons'  with Frodo; but when  the New Row 
was ready he went  with the Gaffer. In addition to all his  other  labours he 
was  busy  directing  the cleaning up and restoring  of Bag End; but he  was 
often away in the Shire on his forestry work. So he was not at home in early 
March and did not know that  Frodo had  been ill. On the  thirteenth of that 
month  Farmer Cotton found Frodo lying on his bed; he was clutching  a white 
gem that hung on a chain about his neck and he seemed half in a dream. 
     'It is gone for ever,' he said, 'and now all is dark and empty.' 
     But the fit  passed, and  when Sam got back on  the twenty-fifth, Frodo 
had  recovered, and he said nothing about  himself. In the meanwhile Bag End 
had  been  set  in order,  and Merry and Pippin came over  from  Crickhollow 
bringing back  all the old furniture  and gear, so that  the  old hole  soon 
looked very much as it always had done. 
     When all was at last ready Frodo said: 'When are you  going to  move in 
and join me, Sam?' 
     Sam looked a bit awkward. 
     'There is no need to come yet, if you don't want to,'  said Frodo. 'But 
you k now the Gaffer  is close at hand, and he will be very well looked after  
by Widow Rumble.' 
     It s not that, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, and he went ver red. 
     'Well, what is it?' 
     'It's Rosie, Rose Cotton,' said Sam. 'It seems she didn't like my going 

####-abroad at all, poor lass; but as I hadn't spoken, she couldn't say so. And I 
didn't speak, because I had  a job to  do first. But now I have  spoken, and 
she says:  "Well, you've  wasted  a year,  so why wait longer?"  "Wasted?" I  
says. "I wouldn't call it that." Still I see what she means. I feel torn  in 
two, as you might say.' 
     'I see,' said Frodo: 'you want to get married, and yet you want to live 
with me in  Bag End too? But my dear  Sam, how easy! Get  married as soon as 
you  can, and then move in with Rosie. There's room enough in Bag End for as 
big a family as you could wish for.' 
     And so it was settled. Sam Gamgee married Rose Cotton in the Spring  of 
1420 (which was  also famous  for its weddings), and they came and lived  at 
Bag End. And if Sam thought himself lucky, Frodo knew that he was more 
lucky 
himself; for there was not a hobbit in the  Shire that was looked after with 
such care. When the labours of repair  had all been planned and set going he 
took to a quiet life, writing a great dea l and  going through all his notes. 
He resigned the office of Deputy Mayor at the Free Fair that mid-summer, and 
dear old Will Whitfoot had another seven years of presiding at Banquets.  
     Merry and Pippin lived together for some time at Crickhollow, and  there 
was  much coming  and  going between  Buckland and Bag  End.  The two  
young 
Travellers cut a great  dash in the Shire  with  their songs and their tales 
and their finery,  and  their wonderful  parties. 'Lordly' folk called them, 
meaning nothing bu t good; for it warmed all hearts to see them go  riding by 
with their mail-shirts so bright and their shields so splendid, laughing and 
singing songs of far away; and if they were now large and magnificent,  they  
were unchanged otherwise, unless they were  indeed  more fairspoken and 
more 
jovial and full of merriment than ever before. 
     Frodo and Sam, however, went back to ordinary attire,  except that when 
there was need they both wore long grey cloaks,  finely woven and clasped at 
the throat with beautiful brooches; and Mr. Frodo wore always a  white jewel 
on a chain that he often would finger. 
     All things now went well, with  hope always of becoming  still  better; 
and Sam  was  as busy and as  full of delight as even a hobbit  could  wish. 
Nothing  for him marred that whole year, except  for some vague anxiety about 
his  master. Frodo dropped quietly  out of all the doings of the  Shire, and 

####-Sam was  pained to notice how little  honour he  had in his own country. Few 
people  knew  or  wanted  to  know about  his  deeds and  adventures;  their 
admiration  and  respect were given mostly  to Mr. Meriadoc and Mr. Peregrin 
and (if Sam had known it) to himself. Also in  the  autumn there appeared  a  
shadow of old troubles.  
     One evening Sam came into the  study and  found his master looking very 
strange. He was very pale and his eyes seemed to see things far away. 
     'What's the matter, Mr. Frodo?' said Sam. 
     'I am wounded,' he answered, 'wounded; it will never really heal.' 
     But then  he  got   up, and the  turn seemed to  pass, and he  was quite 
himself the next day. It was not until afterwards that Sam recalled that the 
date  was October the sixth. Two years before on that day it was dark in the 
dell under Weathertop. 
     Time went on, and 1421 came  in. Frodo was ill again in March, but with 
a great effort he concealed it, for Sam had other things to think about. The 
first of  Sam and Rosie's children was born on the twenty-fifth of  March, a  
date that Sam noted. 
     'Well,  Mr. Frodo,' he said. 'I'm in a bit of  a fix.  Rose  and me had 
settled  to  call him Frodo, with  your leave; but it's  not  him , it's her. 
Though as pretty a maidchild  as any one  could hope for, taking after  Rose 
more than me, luckily. So we don't know what to do.' 
     'Well,  Sam,' said Frodo,  'what's wrong with the old customs? Choose a  
flower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called by such  
names, and what could be better?' 
     'I  suppose  you're  right,  Mr.  Frodo,'  said  Sam.  'I've heard some 
beautiful names on my travels,  but  I  suppose they're  a bit too grand for 
daily wear and tear, as you  might say. The Gaffer, he says: "Make it short, 
and  then you won't have to cut it short before you can use it." But if it's 
to be a  flower-name, then I don't  trouble about  the length: it  must be a  
beautiful  flower, because, you see, I  think  she is very beautiful, and is 
going to be beautifuller still.' 
     Frodo  thought  for  a  moment.  'Well,  Sam,  what  about  elanor, the 
sun-star, you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothlurien?' 
     'You're  right  again, Mr. Frodo!' said  Sam delighted.  'That's what I 
wanted.' 
     Little  Elanor  was nearly six months  old, and 1421  had passed to its 
autumn, when Frodo called Sam into the study. 

####-     'It will be Bilbo's Birthday on Thursday, Sam,'  he  said. 'And he will 
pass the Old Took. He will be a hundred and thirty-one!' 
     'So he will!' said Sam. 'He's a marvel!' 
     'Well,  Sam,' said Frodo. 'I want you to see Rose  and  find out if she 
can spare  you, so that you and I can go off together.  You can't go  far or  
for a long time now, of course,' he said a little wistfully. 
     'Well, not very well, Mr. Frodo.' 
     'Of course not.  But never mind.  You can see me on my way.  Tell  Rose 
that you won't be away very long, not more than a fortnight; and you'll come  
back quite safe.' 
     'I wish I could go all  the way  with  you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and 
see Mr. Bilbo,' said Sam. 'And yet the only place I really want to  be in is 
here. I am that torn in two.' 
     'Poor Sam! It will feel like that, I am  afraid,'  said Frodo. 'But you  
will be healed. You were meant to be solid and whole, and you will be.' 
     In the next day or  two Frodo went through his papers and  his writings 
with Sam, and he handed over his keys.  There was  a big book with plain red 
leather  covers; its  tall  pages were  now almost filled.  At the beginning 
there were many leaves covered with Bilbo's thin wandering hand; but most of 
it was written in Frodo's firm flowing script.  It was divided into chapters 
but  Chapter 80 was unfinished, and after that  were some  blank leaves. The 
title page had many titles on it, crossed out one after another, so: 
 
     My  Diary. My Unexpected  Journey.  There  and  Back  Again.  And  What 
Happened After. 
     Adventures of  Five  Hobbits. The Tale  of the Great  Ring, compiled by 
Bilbo  Baggins from his own  observations  and the  accounts of his friends. 
What we did in the War of the Ring. 
     Here Bilbo's hand ended and Frodo had written: 
 
     THE DOWNFALL 
     OF THE 
     LORD OF THE RINGS 
     AND THE 
     RETURN OF THE KING 
 
     (as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs  of Bilbo and Frodo of 

####-the Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning of 
the Wise.) 
     Together  with  extracts from  Books of  Lore  translated by  Bilbo  in 
Rivendell. 
     'Why, you  have  nearly finished  it, Mr. Frodo!' Sam exclaimed. 'Well, 
you have kept at it, I must say.' 
     'I have quite finished, Sam,' said Frodo. 'The last pages are for you.' 
     On September the twenty-first  they set out together, Frodo on the pony 
that  had  borne him  all the  way  from  Minas  Tirith, and was  now called 
Strider; and Sam on his beloved Bill. It  was a fair golden morning, and Sam 
did not ask where they were going: he thought he could guess. 
     They took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the Woody End, 
and they let their ponies walk  at their leisure.  They camped  in the Green 
Hills,  and  on September the twenty-second  they rode gently down  into the 
beginning of the trees as afternoon was wearing away. 
     'If that isn't the very tree you hid  behind when the Black Rider first 
showed up, Mr. Frodo!' said Sam pointing to the left. 'It seems like a dream 
now.' 
     It  was  evening, and the stars were glimmering  in the  eastern sky as 
they passed the ruined oak and turned and went on  down the hill between the 
hazel-thickets. Sam  was  silent,  deep in his memories. Presently he became 
aware   that  Frodo  was  singing  softly  to  himself,   singing   the  old 
walking-song, but the words were not quite the same. 
     Still round the corner there may wait 
     A new road or a secret gate; 
     And though I oft have passed them by, 
     A day will come at last when I 
     Shall take the hidden paths that run 
     West of the Moon, East of the Sun. 
     And  as if in answer,  from down below,  coming up the road out of  the 
valley, voices sang: 
     A! Elbereth Gilthoniel! 
     silivren penna mnriel 
     o menel aglar elenath, 
     Gilthoniel, A! Elbereth! 
     We still remember, we who dwell 
     In this far land beneath the trees 

####-     The starlight on the Western Seas. 
     Frodo and Sam halted and sat silent in the soft shadows, until they saw 
a shimmer as the travellers came towards them. 
     There was Gildor  and  many fair Elven folk; and there  to Sam's wonder  
rode Elrond and Galadriel. Elrond wore a  mantle of grey and had a star upon 
his forehead, and  a silver harp was in his  hand, and upon his finger was a  
ring of gold with a  great blue stone, Vilya, mightiest of  the  Three.  But 
Galadriel sat upon a white palfrey  and  was robed all in glimmering  white,  
like  clouds  about the Moon; for  she herself seemed  to shine with a  soft 
light.  On  her  finger was Nenya, the ring wrought of mithril ,  that bore a  
single white stone  flickering like a frosty star. Riding slowly behind on a  
small grey pony, and seeming to nod in his sleep, was Bilbo himself. 
     Elrond greeted  them gravely and graciously, and Galadriel  smiled upon  
them. 'Well, Master Samwise,'  she said.  'I hear and see that you have used 
my  gift well. The Shire shall now be  more than ever blessed  and beloved.' 
Sam bowed, but found nothing to say. He had forgotten how beautiful the Lady 
was. 
     Then Bilbo woke up and opened his eyes. 'Hullo, Frodo!' he said. 'Well, 
I have passed the  Old Took today! So that's  settled. And now I think I  am 
quite ready to go on another journey. Are you coming?' 
     'Yes, I am coming,' said Frodo. 'The Ring-bearers should go together.' 
     'Where are you going, Master?' cried Sam, though at last he  understood 
what was happening. 
     'To the Havens, Sam,' said Frodo. 
     'And I can't come.' 
     'No, Sam. Not yet anyway, not  further  than the Havens. Though you too 
were a Ring-bearer, if only  for a little while. Your  time may come. Do not 
be too  sad, Sam. You cannot be always torn in two. You will  have to be one 
and whole, for many years. You have so much to enjoy and to be, and to do.' 
     'But,' said  Sam, and tears started  in his eyes, 'I  thought  you were 
going  to  enjoy the  Shire, too.  for years and  years, after all you  have 
done.' 
     'So I thought too, once. But I have been too deeply hurt, Sam. I  tried 
to  save the Shire, and it has been saved, but not  for me. It must often be 
so, Sam, when things are in danger: some one has to give them up, lose them, 
so that others may keep them. But you are my  heir: all that I had and might  
have had I leave to you.  And also you  have Rose, and Elanor; and Frodo -lad 

####-will  come,  and  Rosie-lass,  and Merry, and  Goldilocks,  and Pippin;  and 
perhaps more  that I  cannot see. Your  hands and  your wits will  be needed 
everywhere. You will be the Mayor, of course, as long a s you want to be, and 
the most famous gardener in history; and you will read things out of the Red 
Book, and keep alive the memory of the age that is gone. so that people will  
remember the Great Danger and so love their beloved land all the  more.  And 
that will  keep  you as busy and as  happy as anyone can be, as long as your 
part of the Story goes on. 
     'Come now, ride with me!' 
     Then Elrond and  Galadriel rode on; for the Third Age was over, and the  
Days of the Rings were passed, and an end was come of the story and  song of 
those  times. With them  went many  Elves of the High Kindred  who  would 
no 
longer stay in  Middle-earth; and among them, filled with a sadness that was 
yet  blessed and without bitterness, rode Sam, and Frodo, and Bilbo, and the 
Elves delighted to honour them. 
     Though they rode through the midst of the Shire all the evening and all 
the night, none saw them  pass,  save the wild creatures; or here  and there 
some wanderer in the dark who saw a swift  shimmer  under  the trees,  or  a  
light and shadow flowing  through the grass as the Moon  went westward.  And 
when  they had passed from the  Shire,  going about the  south skirts of the 
White Downs, they came to the Far Downs,  and to the Towers,  and  looked on 
the  distant Sea; and  so they  rode down at  last to Mithlond,  to the Grey 
Havens in the long firth of Lune. 
     As  they  came  to the gates Cnrdan the Shipwright came  forth to greet 
them. Very tall he was,  and his beard  was long, and he  was grey  and old, 
save that  his eyes were keen as stars; and he looked at them and bowed, and  
said: 'All is now ready.' 
     Then Cnrdan led  them to the Havens, and there  was a white ship lying, 
and upon the  quay  beside a  great  grey horse stood a  figure robed all in 
white awaiting them.  As  he turned and came  towards  them  Frodo saw  that 
Gandalf now wore openly  upon his  hand the Third Ring, Narya the Great, and 
the stone upon it was red as fire.  Then those who were to go were glad, for  
they knew that Gandalf also would take ship with them. 
     But Sam  was now sorrowful at  heart,  and it seemed to him that if the 
parting would be bitter,  more grievous  still would  be  the long road home 
alone. But  even as they stood there, and the Elves were  going aboard,  and 

####-all was being made ready to depart, up rode Merry and Pippin in great haste.  
And amid his tears Pippin laughed. 
     'You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo.' he said. 
'This time you have nearly  succeeded, but you have failed again. It was not  
Sam, though, that gave you away this time, but Gandalf himself!' 
     'Yes,' said Gandalf; 'for it will be better to ride back three together  
'than one alone. Well, here at  last, dear friends, on the shores of the Sea  
comes the end of our fellowship in Middle-earth.  Go in peace!  I  will  not 
say: do not weep; for not all tears are an evil.' 
     Then Frodo  kissed Merry  and Pippin,  and last  of all  Sam,  and went 
aboard; and the sails were drawn up, and  the wind blew, and slowly the ship 
slipped away  down  the  long  grey firth;  and the  light of  the  glass of 
Galadriel that Frodo bore glimmered and was lost. And the ship went out into 
the  High Sea and passed on into the West, until at  last on a night of rain 
Frodo smelled  a sweet  fragrance on the air  and heard the sound of singing  
that came over the water. And  then it seemed to him that as in his dream in 
the house of Bombadil, the grey rain-curtain turned all to silver  glass and  
was  rolled back, and he beheld white  shores and beyond  them  a far  green 
country under a swift sunrise. 
     But to Sam  the evening deepened to darkness as he  stood at the Haven; 
and as he looked at the grey sea he saw only a shadow on the waters that was 
soon lost in the West. There still he stood  far into the night, hearing only 
the  sigh and murmur of  the  waves on  the shores  of Middle-earth, and the 
sound of them sank deep into his  heart.  Beside him stood Merry and Pippin, 
and they were silent. 
     At last the three companions  turned away, and never again looking back  
they rode slowly homewards; and they spoke no word to one another until they 
came  back to the  Shire. but each had great comfort  in his friends  on the 
long grey road. 
     At last they rode over the downs and took the East Road, and then Merry 
and Pippin rode on to Buckland; and already they  were singing again as they 
went. But Sam turned to Bywater,  and so came back up  the Hill,  as day was 
ending  once  more. And  he  went on, and there  was  yellow light, and fire 
within; and the evening meal was ready, and he  was expected.  And Rose drew 
him in, and set him in his chair, and put little Elanor upon his lap. 
     He drew a deep breath. 'Well, I'm back,' he said. 
 

####-